\set
\title Essays On The Gita
\author Sri Aurobindo

\preface
\par
\ht Publisher's Note
\par\nodrop
The first series of {\it Essays on the Gita} appeared in the monthly
review {\it Arya} between August 1916 and July 1918. It was revised by Sri
Aurobindo and published as a book in 1922.
\par The second series appeared in the {\it Arya} between August 1918 and
July 1920. In 1928 Sri Aurobindo brought out an extensively revised edition in
book form.
\par In 1970 {\it Essays on the Gita} was published as volume 13 of the Sri
Aurobindo Birth Centenary Library. This edition was reprinted many times.
\par In 1997 {\it Essays on the Gita} was issued as volume 19 of The
Complete Works of Sri Aurobindo. The text of this edition was carefully
checked against Sri Aurobindo's extant manuscripts and all editions published
before 1950.
\par The text of the present, electronic, edition (1999) is identical to the text
of the CWSA edition. For the convenience of those who use the SABCL
edition, SABCL page numbers are provided as well as the CWSA page
numbers.
Page --

\book
\par
\ht FIRST SERIES
Page 1

\chapter
\par
\hn I
\par
\ht Our Demand and Need\nl from the Gita
\par\drop The world abounds with scriptures sacred and profane, with
revelations and half-revelations, with religions and philosophies, sects and
schools and systems. To these the many minds of a half-ripe knowledge or
no knowledge at all attach themselves with exclusiveness and passion and
will have it that this or the other book is alone the eternal Word of God and all
others are either impostures or at best imperfectly inspired, that this or that
philosophy is the last word of the reasoning intellect and other systems are
either errors or saved only by such partial truth in them as links them to the
one true philosophical cult. Even the discoveries of physical Science have
been elevated into a creed and in its name religion and spirituality banned as
ignorance and superstition, philosophy as frippery and moonshine. And to
these bigoted exclusions and vain wranglings even the wise have often lent
themselves, misled by some spirit of darkness that has mingled with their light
and overshadowed it with some cloud of intellectual egoism or spiritual pride.
Mankind seems now indeed inclined to grow a little modester and wiser; we
no longer slay our fellows in the name of God's truth or because they have
minds differently trained or differently constituted from ours; we are less
ready to curse and revile our neighbour because he is wicked or
presumptuous enough to differ from us in opinion; we are ready even to
admit that Truth is everywhere and cannot be our sole monopoly; we are
beginning to look at other religions and philosophies for the truth and help they
contain and no longer merely in order to damn them as false or criticise what
we conceive to be their errors. But we are still apt to declare that our truth
gives us {\it the} supreme knowledge which other religions or philosophies
Page 3

have missed or only imperfectly grasped so that they deal either with
subsidiary and inferior aspects of the truth of things or can merely prepare
less evolved minds for the heights to which we have arrived. And we are still
prone to force upon ourselves or others the whole sacred mass of the book or
gospel we admire, insisting that all shall be accepted as eternally valid truth
and no iota or underline or diaeresis denied its part of the plenary inspiration.
\par It may therefore be useful in approaching an ancient Scripture, such as
the Veda, Upanishads or Gita, to indicate precisely the spirit in which we
approach it and what exactly we think we may derive from it that is of value
to humanity and its future. First of all, there is undoubtedly a Truth one and
eternal which we are seeking, from which all other truth derives, by the light
of which all other truth finds its right place, explanation and relation to the
scheme of knowledge. But precisely for that reason it cannot be shut up in a
single trenchant formula, it is not likely to be found in its entirety or in all its
bearings in any single philosophy or scripture or uttered altogether and for
ever by any one teacher, thinker, prophet or Avatar. Nor has it been wholly
found by us if our view of it necessitates the intolerant exclusion of the truth
underlying other systems; for when we reject passionately, we mean simply
that we cannot appreciate and explain. Secondly, this Truth, though it is one
and eternal, expresses itself in Time and through the mind of man; therefore
every Scripture must necessarily contain two elements, one temporary,
perishable, belonging to the ideas of the period and country in which it was
produced, the other eternal and imperishable and applicable in all ages and
countries. Moreover, in the statement of the Truth the actual form given to it,
the system and arrangement, the metaphysical and intellectual mould, the
precise expression used must be largely subject to the mutations of Time and
cease to have the same force; for the human intellect modifies itself always;
continually dividing and putting together it is obliged to shift its divisions
continually and to rearrange its syntheses; it is always leaving old expression
and symbol for new or, if it uses the old, it so changes its connotation or at
least
Page 4

its exact content and association that we can never be quite sure of
understanding an ancient book of this kind precisely in the sense and spirit it
bore to its contemporaries. What is of entirely permanent value is that which
besides being universal has been experienced, lived and seen with a higher
than the intellectual vision.
\par I hold it therefore of small importance to extract from the Gita its exact
metaphysical connotation as it was understood by the men of the time,—even
if that were accurately possible. That it is not possible, is shown by the
divergence of the original commentaries which have been and are still being
written upon it; for they all agree in each disagreeing with all the others, each
finds in the Gita its own system of metaphysics and trend of religious thought.
Nor will even the most painstaking and disinterested scholarship and the most
luminous theories of the historical development of Indian philosophy save us
from inevitable error. But what we can do with profit is to seek in the Gita
for the actual living truths it contains, apart from their metaphysical form, to
extract from it what can help us or the world at large and to put it in the most
natural and vital form and expression we can find that will be suitable to the
mentality and helpful to the spiritual needs of our present-day humanity. No
doubt in this attempt we may mix a good deal of error born of our own
individuality and of the ideas in which we live, as did greater men before us,
but if we steep ourselves in the spirit of this great Scripture and, above all, if
we have tried to live in that spirit, we may be sure of finding in it as much
real truth as we are capable of receiving as well as the spiritual influence and
actual help that, personally, we were intended to derive from it. And that is
after all what Scriptures were written to give; the rest is academical
disputation or theological dogma. Only those Scriptures, religions, philosophies
which can be thus constantly renewed, relived, their stuff of permanent truth
constantly reshaped and developed in the inner thought and spiritual
experience of a developing humanity, continue to be of living importance to
mankind. The rest remain as monuments of the past, but have no actual force
or vital impulse for the future.
Page 5

\par In the Gita there is very little that is merely local or temporal and its spirit
is so large, profound and universal that even this little can easily be
universalised without the sense of the teaching suffering any diminution or
violation; rather by giving an ampler scope to it than belonged to the country
and epoch, the teaching gains in depth, truth and power. Often indeed the
Gita itself suggests the wider scope that can in this way be given to an idea in
itself local or limited. Thus it dwells on the ancient Indian system and idea of
sacrifice as an interchange between gods and men,—a system and idea
which have long been practically obsolete in India itself and are no longer real
to the general human mind; but we find here a sense so entirely subtle,
figurative and symbolic given to the word “sacrifice” and the conception of
the gods is so little local or mythological, so entirely cosmic and philosophical
that we can easily accept both as expressive of a practical fact of psychology
and general law of Nature and so apply them to the modern conceptions of
interchange between life and life and of ethical sacrifice and self-giving as to
widen and deepen these and cast over them a more spiritual aspect and the
light of a profounder and more far-reaching Truth. Equally the idea of action
according to the Shastra, the fourfold order of society, the allusion to the
relative position of the four orders or the comparative spiritual disabilities of
Shudras and women seem at first sight local and temporal, and, if they are
too much pressed in their literal sense, narrow so much at least of the
teaching, deprive it of its universality and spiritual depth and limit its validity
for mankind at large. But if we look behind to the spirit and sense and not at
the local name and temporal institution, we see that here too the sense is
deep and true and the spirit philosophical, spiritual and universal. By Shastra
we perceive that the Gita means the law imposed on itself by humanity as a
substitute for the purely egoistic action of the natural unregenerate man and a
control on his tendency to seek in the satisfaction of his desire the standard
and aim of his life. We see too that the fourfold order of society is merely the
concrete form of a spiritual truth which is itself independent of the form; it
rests on the conception of right works as a rightly ordered
Page 6

expression of the nature of the individual being through whom the work is
done, that nature assigning him his line and scope in life according to his
inborn quality and his self-expressive function. Since this is the spirit in which
the Gita advances its most local and particular instances, we are justified in
pursuing always the same principle and looking always for the deeper general
truth which is sure to underlie whatever seems at first sight merely local and
of the time. For we shall find always that the deeper truth and principle is
implied in the grain of the thought even when it is not expressly stated in its
language.
\par Nor shall we deal in any other spirit with the element of philosophical
dogma or religious creed which either enters into the Gita or hangs about it
owing to its use of the philosophical terms and religious symbols current at
the time. When the Gita speaks of Sankhya and Yoga, we shall not discuss
beyond the limits of what is just essential for our statement, the relations of
the Sankhya of the Gita with its one Purusha and strong Vedantic colouring
to the non-theistic or “atheistic” Sankhya that has come down to us bringing
with it its scheme of many Purushas and one Prakriti, nor of the Yoga of the
Gita, many-sided, subtle, rich and flexible to the theistic doctrine and the
fixed, scientific, rigorously defined and graded system of the Yoga of
Patanjali. In the Gita the Sankhya and Yoga are evidently only two
convergent parts of the same Vedantic truth or rather two concurrent ways
of approaching its realisation, the one philosophical, intellectual, analytic, the
other intuitional, devotional, practical, ethical, synthetic, reaching knowledge
through experience. The Gita recognises no real difference in their teachings.
Still less need we discuss the theories which regard the Gita as the fruit of
some particular religious system or tradition. Its teaching is universal
whatever may have been its origins.
\par The philosophical system of the Gita, its arrangement of truth, is not that
part of its teaching which is the most vital, profound, eternally durable; but
most of the material of which the system is composed, the principal ideas
suggestive and penetrating which are woven into its complex harmony, are
eternally valuable and valid; for they are not merely the luminous ideas or
Page 7

striking speculations of a philosophic intellect, but rather enduring truths of
spiritual experience, verifiable facts of our highest psychological possibilities
which no attempt to read deeply the mystery of existence can afford to
neglect. Whatever the system may be, it is not, as the commentators strive to
make it, framed or intended to support any exclusive school of philosophical
thought or to put forward predominantly the claims of any one form of Yoga.
The language of the Gita, the structure of thought, the combination and
balancing of ideas belong neither to the temper of a sectarian teacher nor to
the spirit of a rigorous analytical dialectics cutting off one angle of the truth to
exclude all the others; but rather there is a wide, undulating, encircling
movement of ideas which is the manifestation of a vast synthetic mind and a
rich synthetic experience. This is one of those great syntheses in which
Indian spirituality has been as rich as in its creation of the more intensive,
exclusive movements of knowledge and religious realisation that follow out
with an absolute concentration one clue, one path to its extreme issues. It
does not cleave asunder, but reconciles and unifies.
\par The thought of the Gita is not pure Monism although it sees in one
unchanging, pure, eternal Self the foundation of all cosmic existence, nor
Mayavada although it speaks of the Maya of the three modes of Prakriti
omnipresent in the created world; nor is it qualified Monism although it places
in the One his eternal supreme Prakriti manifested in the form of the Jiva and
lays most stress on dwelling in God rather than dissolution as the supreme
state of spiritual consciousness; nor is it Sankhya although it explains the
created world by the double principle of Purusha and Prakriti; nor is it
Vaishnava Theism although it presents to us Krishna, who is the Avatara of
Vishnu according to the Puranas, as the supreme Deity and allows no
essential difference nor any actual superiority of the status of the indefinable
relationless Brahman over that of this Lord of beings who is the Master of
the universe and the Friend of all creatures. Like the earlier spiritual synthesis
of the Upanishads this later synthesis at once spiritual and intellectual avoids
naturally every such rigid determination as would injure its universal
Page 8

comprehensiveness. Its aim is precisely the opposite to that of the polemist
commentators who found this Scripture established as one of the three
highest Vedantic authorities and attempted to turn it into a weapon of offence
and defence against other schools and systems. The Gita is not a weapon for
dialectical warfare; it is a gate opening on the whole world of spiritual truth
and experience and the view it gives us embraces all the provinces of that
supreme region. It maps out, but it does not cut up or build walls or hedges to
confine our vision.
\par There have been other syntheses in the long history of Indian thought.
We start with the Vedic synthesis of the psychological being of man in its
highest flights and widest rangings of divine knowledge, power, joy, life and
glory with the cosmic existence of the gods, pursued behind the symbols of
the material universe into those superior planes which are hidden from the
physical sense and the material mentality. The crown of this synthesis was in
the experience of the Vedic Rishis something divine, transcendent and blissful
in whose unity the increasing soul of man and the eternal divine fullness of
the cosmic godheads meet perfectly and fulfil themselves. The Upanishads
take up this crowning experience of the earlier seers and make it their
starting-point for a high and profound synthesis of spiritual knowledge; they
draw together into a great harmony all that had been seen and experienced
by the inspired and liberated knowers of the Eternal throughout a great and
fruitful period of spiritual seeking. The Gita starts from this Vedantic
synthesis and upon the basis of its essential ideas builds another harmony of
the three great means and powers, Love, Knowledge and Works, through
which the soul of man can directly approach and cast itself into the Eternal.
There is yet another, the Tantric,
\note{All the Puranic tradition, it must be remembered, draws the richness of
its contents from the Tantra.} which though less subtle and spiritually
profound, is even more bold and forceful than the synthesis of the Gita,—for
it seizes even upon the obstacles to the spiritual life and compels them to
become the means for a richer spiritual conquest and enables us to embrace
the whole
Page 9

of Life in our divine scope as the Lila
\note{The cosmic Play.} of the Divine; and in some directions it is more
immediately rich and fruitful, for it brings forward into the foreground along
with divine knowledge, divine works and an enriched devotion of divine Love,
the secrets also of the Hatha and Raja Yogas, the use of the body and of
mental askesis for the opening up of the divine life on all its planes, to which
the Gita gives only a passing and perfunctory attention. Moreover it grasps at
that idea of the divine perfectibility of man, possessed by the Vedic Rishis but
thrown into the background by the intermediate ages, which is destined to fill
so large a place in any future synthesis of human thought, experience and
aspiration.
\par We of the coming day stand at the head of a new age of development
which must lead to such a new and larger synthesis. We are not called upon
to be orthodox Vedantins of any of the three schools or Tantrics or to adhere
to one of the theistic religions of the past or to entrench ourselves within the
four corners of the teaching of the Gita. That would be to limit ourselves and
to attempt to create our spiritual life out of the being, knowledge and nature
of others, of the men of the past, instead of building it out of our own being
and potentialities. We do not belong to the past dawns, but to the noons of the
future. A mass of new material is flowing into us; we have not only to
assimilate the influences of the great theistic religions of India and of the
world and a recovered sense of the meaning of Buddhism, but to take full
account of the potent though limited revelations of modern knowledge and
seeking; and, beyond that, the remote and dateless past which seemed to be
dead is returning upon us with an effulgence of many luminous secrets long
lost to the consciousness of mankind but now breaking out again from behind
the veil. All this points to a new, a very rich, a very vast synthesis; a fresh
and widely embracing harmonisation of our gains is both an intellectual and a
spiritual necessity of the future. But just as the past syntheses have taken
those which preceded them for their starting-point, so also must that of the
future,
Page 10

to be on firm ground, proceed from what the great bodies of realised spiritual
thought and experience in the past have given. Among them the Gita takes a
most important place.
\par Our object, then, in studying the Gita will not be a scholastic or
academical scrutiny of its thought, nor to place its philosophy in the history of
metaphysical speculation, nor shall we deal with it in the manner of the
analytical dialectician. We approach it for help and light and our aim must be
to distinguish its essential and living message, that in it on which humanity has
to seize for its perfection and its highest spiritual welfare.
Page 11

\par
\HN II
\par
\ht The Divine Teacher
\par\drop The peculiarity of the Gita among the great religious books
\PNOTES of the world is that it does not stand apart as a work by itself, the
fruit of the spiritual life of a creative personality like Christ, Mahomed or
Buddha or of an epoch of pure spiritual searching like the Veda and
Upanishads, but is given as an episode in an epic history of nations and their
wars and men and their deeds and arises out of a critical moment in the soul
of one of its leading personages face to face with the crowning action of his
life, a work terrible, violent and sanguinary, at the point when he must either
recoil from it altogether or carry it through to its inexorable completion. It
matters little whether or no, as modern criticism supposes, the Gita is a later
composition inserted into the mass of the Mahabharata by its author in order
to invest its teaching with the authority and popularity of the great national
epic. There seem to me to be strong grounds against this supposition for
which, besides, the evidence, extrinsic or internal, is in the last degree scanty
and insufficient. But even if it be sound, there remains the fact that the author
has not only taken pains to interweave his work inextricably into the vast web
of the larger poem, but is careful again and again to remind us of the situation
from which the teaching has arisen; he returns to it prominently, not only at
the end, but in the middle of his profoundest philosophical disquisitions. We
must accept the insistence of the author and give its full importance to this
recurrent preoccupation of the Teacher and the disciple. The teaching of the
Gita must therefore be regarded not merely in the light of a general spiritual
philosophy or ethical doctrine, but as bearing upon a practical crisis in the
application of ethics and spirituality to human life. For what that crisis stands,
what is the significance of the battle of Kurukshetra and its effect on
Arjuna's inner being, we have first to determine if we would
Page 12

grasp the central drift of the ideas of the Gita.
\par Very obviously a great body of the profoundest teaching cannot be built
round an ordinary occurrence which has no gulfs of deep suggestion and
hazardous difficulty behind its superficial and outward aspects and can be
governed well enough by the ordinary everyday standards of thought and
action. There are indeed three things in the Gita which are spiritually
significant, almost symbolic, typical of the profoundest relations and problems
of the spiritual life and of human existence at its roots; they are the divine
personality of the Teacher, his characteristic relations with his disciple and
the occasion of his teaching. The teacher is God himself descended into
humanity; the disciple is the first, as we might say in modern language, the
representative man of his age, closest friend and chosen instrument of the
Avatar, his protagonist in an immense work and struggle the secret purpose
of which is unknown to the actors in it, known only to the incarnate Godhead
who guides it all from behind the veil of his unfathomable mind of knowledge;
the occasion is the violent crisis of that work and struggle at the moment
when the anguish and moral difficulty and blind violence of its apparent
movements forces itself with the shock of a visible revelation on the mind of
its representative man and raises the whole question of the meaning of God in
the world and the goal and drift and sense of human life and conduct.
\par India has from ancient times held strongly a belief in the reality of the
Avatara, the descent into form, the revelation of the Godhead in humanity. In
the West this belief has never really stamped itself upon the mind because it
has been presented through exoteric Christianity as a theological dogma
without any roots in the reason and general consciousness and attitude
towards life. But in India it has grown up and persisted as a logical outcome
of the Vedantic view of life and taken firm root in the consciousness of the
race. All existence is a manifestation of God because He is the only
existence and nothing can be except as either a real figuring or else a figment
of that one reality. Therefore every conscious being is in part or in some way
a descent of the Infinite into the apparent finiteness of
Page 13

name and form. But it is a veiled manifestation and there is a gradation
between the supreme being
\note{\s{para bh\=ava.}} of the Divine and the consciousness shrouded partly
or wholly by ignorance of self in the finite. The conscious embodied
soul
\note{\s{deh\=i.}} is the spark of the divine Fire and that soul in man opens out
to self-knowledge as it develops out of ignorance of self into self-being. The
Divine also, pouring itself into the forms of the cosmic existence, is revealed
ordinarily in an efflorescence of its powers, in energies and magnitudes of its
knowledge, love, joy, developed force of being,
\note{\s{vibh\=uti.}} in degrees and faces of its divinity. But when the divine
Consciousness and Power, taking upon itself the human form and the human
mode of action, possesses it not only by powers and magnitudes, by degrees
and outward faces of itself but out of its eternal self-knowledge, when the
Unborn knows itself and acts in the frame of the mental being and the
appearance of birth, that is the height of the conditioned manifestation; it is
the full and conscious descent of the Godhead, it is the Avatara. \LNOTES
\par The Vaishnava form of Vedantism which has laid most stress upon this
conception expresses the relation of God in man to man in God by the double
figure of Nara-Narayana, associated historically with the origin of a religious
school very similar in its doctrines to the teaching of the Gita. Nara is the
human soul which, eternal companion of the Divine, finds itself only when it
awakens to that companionship and begins, as the Gita would say, to live in
God. Narayana is the divine Soul always present in our humanity, the secret
guide, friend and helper of the human being, the “Lord who abides within the
heart of creatures” of the Gita; when within us the veil of that secret
sanctuary is withdrawn and man speaks face to face with God, hears the
divine voice, receives the divine light, acts in the divine power, then becomes
possible the supreme uplifting of the embodied human conscious-being into
the unborn and eternal. He becomes capable of that dwelling in God and
giving up of his whole consciousness into the Divine which the Gita upholds
as the best or highest secret of things, \s{uttama\.m rahasyam}. When
Page 14

this eternal divine Consciousness always present in every human being, this
God in man, takes possession partly
\note{Chaitanya, the Avatar of Nadiya, is said to have been thus partly or
occasionally occupied by the divine Consciousness and Power.} or wholly of
the human consciousness and becomes in visible human shape the guide,
teacher, leader of the world, not as those who living in their humanity yet feel
something of the power or light or love of the divine Gnosis informing and
conducting them, but out of that divine Gnosis itself, direct from its central
force and plenitude, then we have the manifest Avatar. The inner Divinity is
the eternal Avatar in man; the human manifestation is its sign and
development in the external world.
\par When we thus understand the conception of Avatarhood, we see that
whether for the fundamental teaching of the Gita, our present subject, or for
spiritual life generally the external aspect has only a secondary importance.
Such controversies as the one that has raged in Europe over the historicity of
Christ, would seem to a spiritually-minded Indian largely a waste of time; he
would concede to it a considerable historical, but hardly any religious
importance; for what does it matter in the end whether a Jesus son of the
carpenter Joseph was actually born in Nazareth or Bethlehem, lived and
taught and was done to death on a real or trumped-up charge of sedition, so
long as we can know by spiritual experience the inner Christ, live uplifted in
the light of his teaching and escape from the yoke of the natural Law by that
atonement of man with God of which the crucifixion is the symbol? If the
Christ, God made man, lives within our spiritual being, it would seem to
matter little whether or not a son of Mary physically lived and suffered and
died in Judea. So too the Krishna who matters to us is the eternal incarnation
of the Divine and not the historical teacher and leader of men.
\par In seeking the kernel of the thought of the Gita we need, therefore, only
concern ourselves with the spiritual significance of the human-divine Krishna
of the Mahabharata who is presented to us as the teacher of Arjuna on the
battle-field of Kurukshetra. The historical Krishna, no doubt, existed. We
meet
Page 15

the name first in the Chhandogya Upanishad where all we can gather about
him is that he was well known in spiritual tradition as a knower of the
Brahman, so well known indeed in his personality and the circumstances of
his life that it was sufficient to refer to him by the name of his mother as
Krishna son of Devaki for all to understand who was meant. In the same
Upanishad we find mention of King Dhritarashtra son of Vichitravirya, and
since tradition associated the two together so closely that they are both of
them leading personages in the action of the Mahabharata, we may fairly
conclude that they were actually contemporaries and that the epic is to a
great extent dealing with historical characters and in the war of Kurukshetra
with a historical occurrence imprinted firmly on the memory of the race. We
know too that Krishna and Arjuna were the object of religious worship in the
pre-Christian centuries; and there is some reason to suppose that they were
so in connection with a religious and philosophical tradition from which the
Gita may have gathered many of its elements and even the foundation of its
synthesis of knowledge, devotion and works, and perhaps also that the human
Krishna was the founder, restorer or at the least one of the early teachers of
this school. The Gita may well in spite of its later form represent the outcome
in Indian thought of the teaching of Krishna and the connection of that
teaching with the historical Krishna, with Arjuna and with the war of
Kurukshetra may be something more than a dramatic fiction. In the
Mahabharata Krishna is represented both as the historical character and the
Avatar; his worship and Avatarhood must therefore have been well
established by the time—apparently from the fifth to the first centuries
\BC B.C. —when the old story and poem or epic tradition of the Bharatas
took its present form. There is a hint also in the poem of the story or legend
of the Avatar's early life in Vrindavan which, as developed by the Puranas
into an intense and powerful spiritual symbol, has exercised so profound an
influence on the religious mind of India. We have also in the Harivansha an
account of the life of Krishna, very evidently full of legends, which perhaps
formed the basis of the Puranic accounts.
Page 16

\par But all this, though of considerable historical importance, has none
whatever for our present purpose. We are concerned only with the figure of
the divine Teacher as it is presented to us in the Gita and with the Power for
which it there stands in the spiritual illumination of the human being. The Gita
accepts the human Avatarhood; for the Lord speaks of the repeated, the
constant
\note{\s{bah\=uni me vyat\=it\=ani janm\=ani}\sdots . . . \s{sambhav\=ami yuge
yuge}.} manifestation of the Divine in humanity, when He the eternal Unborn
assumes by his Maya, by the power of the infinite Consciousness to clothe
itself apparently in finite forms, the conditions of becoming which we call
birth. But it is not this upon which stress is laid, but on the transcendent, the
cosmic and the internal Divine; it is on the Source of all things and the Master
of all and on the Godhead secret in man. It is this internal divinity who is
meant when the Gita speaks of the doer of violent Asuric austerities troubling
the God within or of the sin of those who despise the Divine lodged in the
human body or of the same Godhead destroying our ignorance by the blazing
lamp of knowledge. It is then the eternal Avatar, this God in man, the divine
Consciousness always present in the human being who manifested in a visible
form speaks to the human soul in the Gita, illumines the meaning of life and
the secret of divine action and gives it the light of the divine knowledge and
guidance and the assuring and fortifying word of the Master of existence in
the hour when it comes face to face with the painful mystery of the world.
This is what the Indian religious consciousness seeks to make near to itself in
whatever form, whether in the symbolic human image it enshrines in its
temples or in the worship of its Avatars or in the devotion to the human Guru
through whom the voice of the one world-Teacher makes itself heard.
Through these it strives to awaken to that inner voice, unveil that form of the
Formless and stand face to face with that manifest divine Power, Love and
Knowledge.
\par Secondly, there is the typical, almost the symbolic significance of the
human Krishna who stands behind the great action of the Mahabharata, not
as its hero, but as its secret centre
Page 17

and hidden guide. That action is the action of a whole world of men and
nations, some of whom have come as helpers of an effort and result by
which they do not personally profit, and to these he is a leader, some as its
opponents and to them he also is an opponent, the baffler of their designs and
their slayer and he seems even to some of them an instigator of all evil and
destroyer of their old order and familiar world and secure conventions of
virtue and good; some are representatives of that which has to be fulfilled
and to them he is counsellor, helper, friend. Where the action pursues its
natural course or the doers of the work have to suffer at the hands of its
enemies and undergo the ordeals which prepare them for mastery, the
Avatar is unseen or appears only for occasional comfort and aid, but at every
crisis his hand is felt, yet in such a way that all imagine themselves to be the
protagonists and even Arjuna, his nearest friend and chief instrument, does
not perceive that he is an instrument and has to confess at last that all the
while he did not really know his divine Friend. He has received counsel from
his wisdom, help from his power, has loved and been loved, has even adored
without understanding his divine nature; but he has been guided like all others
through his own egoism and the counsel, help and direction have been given
in the language and received by the thoughts of the Ignorance. Until the
moment when all has been pushed to the terrible issue of the struggle on the
field of Kurukshetra and the Avatar stands at last, still not as fighter, but as
the charioteer in the battle-car which carries the destiny of the fight, he has
not revealed Himself even to those whom he has chosen.
\par Thus the figure of Krishna becomes, as it were, the symbol of the divine
dealings with humanity. Through our egoism and ignorance we are moved,
thinking that we are the doers of the work, vaunting of ourselves as the real
causes of the result, and that which moves us we see only occasionally as
some vague or even some human and earthly fountain of knowledge,
aspiration, force, some Principle or Light or Power which we acknowledge
and adore without knowing what it is until the occasion arises that forces us
to stand arrested before the Veil.
Page 18

And the action in which this divine figure moves is the whole wide action of
man in life, not merely the inner life, but all this obscure course of the world
which we can judge only by the twilight of the human reason as it opens up
dimly before our uncertain advance the little span in front. This is the
distinguishing feature of the Gita that it is the culmination of such an action
which gives rise to its teaching and assigns that prominence and bold relief to
the gospel of works which it enunciates with an emphasis and force we do
not find in other Indian Scriptures. Not only in the Gita, but in other passages
of the Mahabharata we meet with Krishna declaring emphatically the
necessity of action, but it is here that he reveals its secret and the divinity
behind our works.
\par The symbolic companionship of Arjuna and Krishna, the human and the
divine soul, is expressed elsewhere in Indian thought, in the heavenward
journey of Indra and Kutsa seated in one chariot, in the figure of the two
birds upon one tree in the Upanishad, in the twin figures of Nara and
Narayana, the seers who do \s{tapasy\=a} together for the knowledge. But in
all three it is the idea of the divine knowledge in which, as the Gita says, all
action culminates that is in view; here it is instead the action which leads to
that knowledge and in which the divine Knower figures himself. Arjuna and
Krishna, this human and this divine, stand together not as seers in the
peaceful hermitage of meditation, but as fighter and holder of the reins in the
clamorous field, in the midst of the hurtling shafts, in the chariot of battle. The
Teacher of the Gita is therefore not only the God in man who unveils himself
in the word of knowledge, but the God in man who moves our whole world of
action, by and for whom all our humanity exists and struggles and labours,
towards whom all human life travels and progresses. He is the secret Master
of works and sacrifice and the Friend of the human peoples.
Page 19

\par
\HN III
\par
\ht The Human Disciple
\par\drop Such then is the divine Teacher of the Gita, the eternal Avatar, the
Divine who has descended into the human consciousness, the Lord seated
within the heart of all beings, He who guides from behind the veil all our
thought and action and heart's seeking even as He directs from behind the
veil of visible and sensible forms and forces and tendencies the great
universal action of the world which He has manifested in His own being. All
the strife of our upward endeavour and seeking finds its culmination and
ceases in a satisfied fulfilment when we can rend the veil and get behind our
apparent self to this real Self, can realise our whole being in this true Lord of
our being, can give up our personality to and into this one real Person, merge
our ever-dispersed and ever-converging mental activities into His plenary
light, offer up our errant and struggling will and energies into His vast,
luminous and undivided Will, at once renounce and satisfy all our dissipated
outward-moving desires and emotions in the plenitude of His self-existent
Bliss. This is the world-Teacher of whose eternal knowledge all other highest
teaching is but the various reflection and partial word, this the Voice to which
the hearing of our soul has to awaken.
\par Arjuna, the disciple who receives his initiation on the battlefield, is a
counterpart of this conception; he is the type of the struggling human soul
who has not yet received the knowledge, but has grown fit to receive it by
action in the world in a close companionship and an increasing nearness to
the higher and divine Self in humanity. There is a method of explaining the
Gita in which not only this episode but the whole Mahabharata is turned into
an allegory of the inner life and has nothing to do with our outward human life
and action, but only with the battles of the soul and the powers that strive
within us for possession. That is a view which the general character and the
Page 20

actual language of the epic does not justify and, if pressed, would turn the
straightforward philosophical language of the Gita into a constant, laborious
and somewhat puerile mystification. The language of the Veda and part at
least of the Puranas is plainly symbolic, full of figures and concrete
representations of things that lie behind the veil, but the Gita is written in plain
terms and professes to solve the great ethical and spiritual difficulties which
the life of man raises, and it will not do to go behind this plain language and
thought and wrest them to the service of our fancy. But there is this much of
truth in the view, that the setting of the doctrine though not symbolical, is
certainly typical, as indeed the setting of such a discourse as the Gita must
necessarily be if it is to have any relation at all with that which it frames.
Arjuna, as we have seen, is the representative man of a great world-struggle
and divinely-guided movement of men and nations; in the Gita he typifies the
human soul of action brought face to face through that action in its highest
and most violent crisis with the problem of human life and its apparent
incompatibility with the spiritual state or even with a purely ethical ideal of
perfection.
\par Arjuna is the fighter in the chariot with the divine Krishna as his
charioteer. In the Veda also we have this image of the human soul and the
divine riding in one chariot through a great battle to the goal of a high-aspiring
effort. But there it is a pure figure and symbol. The Divine is there Indra, the
Master of the World of Light and Immortality, the power of divine knowledge
which descends to the aid of the human seeker battling with the sons of
falsehood, darkness, limitation, mortality; the battle is with spiritual enemies
who bar the way to the higher world of our being; and the goal is that plane
of vast being resplendent with the light of the supreme Truth and uplifted to
the conscious immortality of the perfected soul, of which Indra is the master.
The human soul is Kutsa, he who constantly seeks the seer-knowledge, as his
name implies, and he is the son of Arjuna or Arjuni, the White One, child of
Switra the White Mother; he is, that is to say, the sattwic or purified and
light-filled soul which is open to the unbroken glories of the divine knowledge.
And
Page 21

when the chariot reaches the end of its journey, the own home of Indra, the
human Kutsa has grown into such an exact likeness of his divine companion
that he can only be distinguished by Sachi, the wife of Indra, because she is
“truth-conscious”. The parable is evidently of the inner life of man; it is a
figure of the human growing into the likeness of the eternal divine by the
increasing illumination of Knowledge. But the Gita starts from action and
Arjuna is the man of action and not of knowledge, the fighter, never the seer
or the thinker.
\par From the beginning of the Gita this characteristic temperament of the
disciple is clearly indicated and it is maintained throughout. It becomes first
evident in the manner in which he is awakened to the sense of what he is
doing, the great slaughter of which he is to be the chief instrument, in the
thoughts which immediately rise in him, in the standpoint and the
psychological motives which make him recoil from the whole terrible
catastrophe. They are not the thoughts, the standpoint, the motives of a
philosophical or even of a deeply reflective mind or a spiritual temperament
confronted with the same or a similar problem. They are those, as we might
say, of the practical or the pragmatic man, the emotional, sensational, moral
and intelligent human being not habituated to profound and original reflection
or any sounding of the depths, accustomed rather to high but fixed standards
of thought and action and a confident treading through all vicissitudes and
difficulties, who now finds all his standards failing him and all the basis of his
confidence in himself and his life shorn away from under him at a single
stroke. That is the nature of the crisis which he undergoes.
\par Arjuna is, in the language of the Gita, a man subject to the action of the
three gunas or modes of the Nature-Force and habituated to move
unquestioningly in that field, like the generality of men. He justifies his name
only in being so far pure and sattwic as to be governed by high and clear
principles and impulses and habitually control his lower nature by the noblest
Law which he knows. He is not of a violent Asuric disposition, not the slave
of his passions, but has been trained to a high calm and self-control, to an
unswerving performance of his duties
Page 22

and firm obedience to the best principles of the time and society in which he
has lived and the religion and ethics to which he has been brought up. He is
egoistic like other men, but with the purer or sattwic egoism which regards
the moral law and society and the claims of others and not only or
predominantly his own interests, desires and passions. He has lived and
guided himself by the Shastra, the moral and social code. The thought which
preoccupies him, the standard which he obeys is the \s{dharma}, that
collective Indian conception of the religious, social and moral rule of conduct,
and especially the rule of the station and function to which he belongs, he the
Kshatriya, the high-minded, self-governed, chivalrous prince and warrior and
leader of Aryan men. Following always this rule, conscious of virtue and right
dealing he has travelled so far and finds suddenly that it has led him to
become the protagonist of a terrific and unparalleled slaughter, a monstrous
civil war involving all the cultured Aryan nations which must lead to the
complete destruction of the flower of their manhood and threatens their
ordered civilisation with chaos and collapse.
\par It is typical again of the pragmatic man that it is through his sensations
that he awakens to the meaning of his action. He has asked his friend and
charioteer to place him between the two armies, not with any profounder
idea, but with the proud intention of viewing and looking in the face these
myriads of the champions of unrighteousness whom he has to meet and
conquer and slay “in this holiday of fight” so that the right may prevail. It is
as he gazes that the revelation of the meaning of a civil and domestic war
comes home to him, a war in which not only men of the same race, the same
nation, the same clan, but those of the same family and household stand upon
opposite sides. All whom the social man holds most dear and sacred, he must
meet as enemies and slay,—the worshipped teacher and preceptor, the old
friend, comrade and companion in arms, grandsires, uncles, those who stood
in the relation to him of father, of son, of grandson, connections by blood and
connections by marriage,—all these social ties have to be cut asunder by the
sword. It is not that he did not know these things before, but he has
Page 23

never realised it all; obsessed by his claims and wrongs and by the principles
of his life, the struggle for the right, the duty of the Kshatriya to protect
justice and the law and fight and beat down injustice and lawless violence, he
has neither thought it out deeply nor felt it in his heart and at the core of his
life. And now it is shown to his vision by the divine charioteer, placed
sensationally before his eyes, and comes home to him like a blow delivered at
the very centre of his sensational, vital and emotional being.
\par The first result is a violent sensational and physical crisis which produces
a disgust of the action and its material objects and of life itself. He rejects the
vital aim pursued by egoistic humanity in its action,—happiness and
enjoyment; he rejects the vital aim of the Kshatriya, victory and rule and
power and the government of men. What after all is this fight for justice
when reduced to its practical terms, but just this, a fight for the interests of
himself, his brothers and his party, for possession and enjoyment and rule?
But at such a cost these things are not worth having. For they are of no value
in themselves, but only as a means to the right maintenance of social and
national life and it is these very aims that in the person of his kin and his race
he is about to destroy. And then comes the cry of the emotions. These are
they for whose sake life and happiness are desired, our “own people”. Who
would consent to slay these for the sake of all the earth, or even for the
kingdom of the three worlds? What pleasure can there be in life, what
happiness, what satisfaction in oneself after such a deed? The whole thing is
a dreadful sin,—for now the moral sense awakens to justify the revolt of the
sensations and the emotions. It is a sin, there is no right nor justice in mutual
slaughter; especially are those who are to be slain the natural objects of
reverence and of love, those without whom one would not care to live, and to
violate these sacred feelings can be no virtue, can be nothing but a heinous
crime. Granted that the offence, the aggression, the first sin, the crimes of
greed and selfish passion which have brought things to such a pass came
from the other side; yet armed resistance to wrong under such circumstances
would be itself a sin and
Page 24

crime worse than theirs because they are blinded by passion and unconscious
of guilt, while on this side it would be with a clear sense of guilt that the sin
would be committed. And for what? For the maintenance of family morality,
of the social law and the law of the nation? These are the very standards that
will be destroyed by this civil war; the family itself will be brought to the point
of annihilation, corruption of morals and loss of the purity of race will be
engendered, the eternal laws of the race and moral law of the family will be
destroyed. Ruin of the race, the collapse of its high traditions, ethical
degradation and hell for the authors of such a crime, these are the only
practical results possible of this monstrous civil strife. “Therefore,” cries
Arjuna, casting down the divine bow and inexhaustible quiver given to him by
the gods for that tremendous hour, “it is more for my welfare that the sons of
Dhritarashtra armed should slay me unarmed and unresisting. I will not
fight.”
\par The character of this inner crisis is therefore not the questioning of the
thinker; it is not a recoil from the appearances of life and a turning of the eye
inward in search of the truth of things, the real meaning of existence and a
solution or an escape from the dark riddle of the world. It is the sensational,
emotional and moral revolt of the man hitherto satisfied with action and its
current standards who finds himself cast by them into a hideous chaos where
they are in violent conflict with each other and with themselves and there is
no moral standing-ground left, nothing to lay hold of and walk by, no
\s{dharma}.
\note{{\it Dharma} means literally that which one lays hold of and which
holds things together, the law, the norm, the rule of nature, action and life.}
That for the soul of action in the mental being is the worst possible crisis,
failure and overthrow. The revolt itself is the most elemental and simple
possible; sensationally, the elemental feeling of horror, pity and disgust; vitally,
the loss of attraction and faith in the recognised and familiar objects of action
and aims of life; emotionally, the recoil of the ordinary feelings of social man,
affection, reverence, desire of a common happiness and satisfaction, from a
stern duty outraging them all; morally, the elementary sense of sin and
Page 25

hell and rejection of “blood-stained enjoyments”; practically, the sense that
the standards of action have led to a result which destroys the practical aims
of action. But the whole upshot is that all-embracing inner bankruptcy which
Arjuna expresses when he says that his whole conscious being, not the
thought alone but heart and vital desires and all, are utterly bewildered and
can find nowhere the \s{dharma}, nowhere any valid law of action. For this
alone he takes refuge as a disciple with Krishna; give me, he practically asks,
that which I have lost, a true law, a clear rule of action, a path by which I can
again confidently walk. He does not ask for the secret of life or of the world,
the meaning and purpose of it all, but for a \s{dharma}.
\par Yet it is precisely this secret for which he does not ask, or at least so
much of the knowledge as is necessary to lead him into a higher life, to which
the divine Teacher intends to lead this disciple; for he means him to give up
all \s{dharmas} except the one broad and vast rule of living consciously in the
Divine and acting from that consciousness. Therefore after testing the
completeness of his revolt from the ordinary standards of conduct, he
proceeds to tell him much that has to do with the state of the soul, but nothing
of any outward rule of action. He must be equal in soul, abandon the desire
of the fruits of work, rise above his intellectual notions of sin and virtue, live
and act in Yoga with a mind in Samadhi, firmly fixed, that is to say, in the
Divine alone. Arjuna is not satisfied: he wishes to know how the change to
this state will affect the outward action of the man, what result it will have on
his speech, his movements, his state, what difference it will make in this
acting, living human being. Krishna persists merely in enlarging upon the
ideas he has already brought forward, on the soul-state behind the action, not
on the action itself. It is the fixed anchoring of the intelligence in a state of
desireless equality that is the one thing needed. Arjuna breaks out
impatiently,—for here is no rule of conduct such as he sought, but rather, as it
seems to him, the negation of all action,—“If thou holdest the intelligence to
be greater than action, why then dost thou appoint me to an action terrible in
its nature? Thou bewilderest my understanding with a mingled
Page 26

word: speak one thing decisively by which I can attain to what is the best.” It
is always the pragmatic man who has no value for metaphysical thought or
for the inner life except when they help him to his one demand, a \s{dharma},
a law of life in the world or, if need be, of leaving the world; for that too is a
decisive action which he can understand. But to live and act in the world, yet
be above it, this is a “mingled” and confusing word the sense of which he has
no patience to grasp.
\par The rest of Arjuna's questions and utterances proceed from the same
temperament and character. When he is told that once the soul-state is
assured there need be no apparent change in the action, he must act always
by the law of his nature, even if the act itself seem faulty and deficient
compared with that of another law than his own, he is troubled. The nature!
but what of this sense of sin in the action with which he is preoccupied? is it
not this very nature which drives men as if by force and even against their
better will into sin and guilt? His practical intelligence is baffled by Krishna's
assertion that it was he who in ancient times revealed to Vivasvan this Yoga,
since lost, which he is now again revealing to Arjuna, and by his demand for
an explanation he provokes the famous and oft-quoted statement of
Avatarhood and its mundane purpose. He is again perplexed by the words in
which Krishna continues to reconcile action and renunciation of action and
asks once again for a decisive statement of that which is the best and highest,
not this “mingled” word. When he realises fully the nature of the Yoga which
he is bidden to embrace, his pragmatic nature accustomed to act from mental
will and preference and desire is appalled by its difficulty and he asks what is
the end of the soul which attempts and fails, whether it does not lose both this
life of human activity and thought and emotion which it has left behind and
the Brahmic consciousness to which it aspires and falling from both perish
like a dissolving cloud?
\par When his doubts and perplexities are resolved and he knows that it is the
Divine which must be his law, he aims again and always at such clear and
decisive knowledge as will guide him practically to this source and this rule of
his future action. How
Page 27

is the Divine to be distinguished among the various states of being which
constitute our ordinary experience? What are the great manifestations of its
self-energy in the world in which he can recognise and realise it by
meditation? May he not see even now the divine cosmic Form of That which
is actually speaking to him through the veil of the human mind and body? And
his last questions demand a clear distinction between renunciation of works
and this subtler renunciation he is asked to prefer; the actual difference
between Purusha and Prakriti, the Field and the Knower of the Field, so
important for the practice of desireless action under the drive of the divine
Will; and finally a clear statement of the practical operations and results of
the three modes of Prakriti which he is bidden to surmount.
\par To such a disciple the Teacher of the Gita gives his divine teaching. He
seizes him at a moment of his psychological development by egoistic action
when all the mental, moral, emotional values of the ordinary egoistic and
social life of man have collapsed in a sudden bankruptcy, and he has to lift
him up out of this lower life into a higher consciousness, out of ignorant
attachment to action into that which transcends, yet originates and orders
action, out of ego into Self, out of life in mind, vitality and body into that
higher nature beyond mind which is the status of the Divine. He has at the
same time to give him that for which he asks and for which he is inspired to
seek by the guidance within him, a new Law of life and action high above the
insufficient rule of the ordinary human existence with its endless conflicts and
oppositions, perplexities and illusory certainties, a higher Law by which the
soul shall be free from this bondage of works and yet powerful to act and
conquer in the vast liberty of its divine being. For the action must be
performed, the world must fulfil its cycles and the soul of the human being
must not turn back in ignorance from the work it is here to do. The whole
course of the teaching of the Gita is determined and directed, even in its
widest wheelings, towards the fulfilment of these three objects.
Page 28

\par
\HN IV
\par
\ht The Core of the Teaching
\par\drop We know the divine Teacher, we see the human disciple; it remains
to form a clear conception of the doctrine. A clear conception fastening upon
the essential idea, the central heart of the teaching is especially necessary
here because the Gita with its rich and many-sided thought, its synthetical
grasp of different aspects of the spiritual life and the fluent winding motion of
its argument lends itself, even more than other scriptures, to one-sided
misrepresentations born of a partisan intellectuality. The unconscious or
half-conscious wresting of fact and word and idea to suit a preconceived
notion or the doctrine or principle of one's preference is recognised by Indian
logicians as one of the most fruitful sources of fallacy; and it is perhaps the
one which it is most difficult for even the most conscientious thinker to avoid.
For the human reason is incapable of always playing the detective upon itself
in this respect; it is its very nature to seize upon some partial conclusion, idea,
principle, become its partisan and make it the key to all truth, and it has an
infinite faculty of doubling upon itself so as to avoid detecting in its operations
this necessary and cherished weakness. The Gita lends itself easily to this
kind of error, because it is easy, by throwing particular emphasis on one of its
aspects or even on some salient and emphatic text and putting all the rest of
the eighteen chapters into the background or making them a subordinate and
auxiliary teaching, to turn it into a partisan of our own doctrine or dogma.
\par Thus, there are those who make the Gita teach, not works at all, but a
discipline of preparation for renouncing life and works: the indifferent
performance of prescribed actions or of whatever task may lie ready to the
hands, becomes the means, the discipline; the final renunciation of life and
works is the sole real object. It is quite easy to justify this view by citations
from
Page 29

the book and by a certain arrangement of stress in following out its argument,
especially if we shut our eyes to the peculiar way in which it uses such a
word as \s{sanny\=asa}, renunciation; but it is quite impossible to persist in this
view on an impartial reading in face of the continual assertion to the very end
that action should be preferred to inaction and that superiority lies with the
true, the inner renunciation of desire by equality and the giving up of works to
the supreme Purusha.
\par Others again speak of the Gita as if the doctrine of devotion were its
whole teaching and put in the background its monistic elements and the high
place it gives to quietistic immergence in the one self of all. And undoubtedly
its emphasis on devotion, its insistence on the aspect of the Divine as Lord
and Purusha and its doctrine of the Purushottama, the Supreme Being who is
superior both to the mutable Being and to the Immutable and who is what in
His relation to the world we know as God, are the most striking and among
the most vital elements of the Gita. Still, this Lord is the Self in whom all
knowledge culminates and the Master of sacrifice to whom all works lead as
well as the Lord of Love into whose being the heart of devotion enters, and
the Gita preserves a perfectly equal balance, emphasising now knowledge,
now works, now devotion, but for the purposes of the immediate trend of the
thought, not with any absolute separate preference of one over the others.
He in whom all three meet and become one, He is the Supreme Being, the
Purushottama.
\par But at the present day, since in fact the modern mind began to recognise
and deal at all with the Gita, the tendency is to subordinate its elements of
knowledge and devotion, to take advantage of its continual insistence on
action and to find in it a scripture of the Karmayoga, a Light leading us on the
path of action, a Gospel of Works. Undoubtedly, the Gita is a Gospel of
Works, but of works which culminate in knowledge, that is, in spiritual
realisation and quietude, and of works motived by devotion, that is, a
conscious surrender of one's whole self first into the hands and then into the
being of the Supreme, and not at all of works as they are understood by the
modern mind, not at all an action dictated by egoistic and altruistic, by
personal,
Page 30

social, humanitarian motives, principles, ideals. Yet this is what present-day
interpretations seek to make of the Gita. We are told continually by many
authoritative voices that the Gita, opposing in this the ordinary ascetic and
quietistic tendency of Indian thought and spirituality, proclaims with no
uncertain sound the gospel of human action, the ideal of disinterested
performance of social duties, nay, even, it would seem, the quite modern ideal
of social service. To all this I can only reply that very patently and even on
the very surface of it the Gita does nothing of the kind and that this is a
modern misreading, a reading of the modern mind into an ancient book, of the
present-day European or Europeanised intellect into a thoroughly antique, a
thoroughly Oriental and Indian teaching. That which the Gita teaches is not a
human, but a divine action; not the performance of social duties, but the
abandonment of all other standards of duty or conduct for a selfless
performance of the divine will working through our nature; not social service,
but the action of the Best, the God-possessed, the Master-men done
impersonally for the sake of the world and as a sacrifice to Him who stands
behind man and Nature.
\par In other words, the Gita is not a book of practical ethics, but of the
spiritual life. The modern mind is just now the European mind, such as it has
become after having abandoned not only the philosophic idealism of the
highest Graeco-Roman culture from which it started, but the Christian
devotionalism of the Middle Ages; these it has replaced by or transmuted into
a practical idealism and social, patriotic and philanthropic devotion. It has got
rid of God or kept Him only for Sunday use and erected in His place man as
its deity and society as its visible idol. At its best it is practical, ethical, social,
pragmatic, altruistic, humanitarian. Now all these things are good, are
especially needed at the present day, are part of the divine Will or they would
not have become so dominant in humanity. Nor is there any reason why the
divine man, the man who lives in the Brahmic consciousness, in the
God-being should not be all of these things in his action; he will be, if they are
the best ideal of the age, the Yugadharma, and there is no yet higher ideal to
be established,
Page 31

no great radical change to be effected. For he is, as the Teacher points out to
his disciple, the best who has to set the standard for others; and in fact
Arjuna is called upon to live according to the highest ideals of his age and the
prevailing culture, but with knowledge, with understanding of that which lay
behind, and not as ordinary men, with a following of the merely outward law
and rule.
\par But the point here is that the modern mind has exiled from its practical
motive-power the two essential things, God or the Eternal and spirituality or
the God-state, which are the master conceptions of the Gita. It lives in
humanity only, and the Gita would have us live in God, though for the world in
God; in its life, heart and intellect only, and the Gita would have us live in the
spirit; in the mutable Being who is “all creatures”, and the Gita would have us
live also in the Immutable and the Supreme; in the changing march of Time,
and the Gita would have us live in the Eternal. Or if these higher things are
now beginning to be vaguely envisaged, it is only to make them subservient to
man and society; but God and spirituality exist in their own right and not as
adjuncts. And in practice the lower in us must learn to exist for the higher, in
order that the higher also may in us consciously exist for the lower, to draw it
nearer to its own altitudes.
\par Therefore it is a mistake to interpret the Gita from the standpoint of the
mentality of today and force it to teach us the disinterested performance of
duty as the highest and all-sufficient law. A little consideration of the situation
with which the Gita deals will show us that this could not be its meaning. For
the whole point of the teaching, that from which it arises, that which compels
the disciple to seek the Teacher, is an inextricable clash of the various related
conceptions of duty ending in the collapse of the whole useful intellectual and
moral edifice erected by the human mind. In human life some sort of a clash
arises fairly often, as for instance between domestic duties and the call of the
country or the cause, or between the claim of the country and the good of
humanity or some larger religious or moral principle. An inner situation may
even arise, as with the Buddha, in which
Page 32

all duties have to be abandoned, trampled on, flung aside in order to follow
the call of the Divine within. I cannot think that the Gita would solve such an
inner situation by sending Buddha back to his wife and father and the
government of the Sakya State, or would direct a Ramakrishna to become a
Pundit in a vernacular school and disinterestedly teach little boys their
lessons, or bind down a Vivekananda to support his family and for that to
follow dispassionately the law or medicine or journalism. The Gita does not
teach the disinterested performance of duties but the following of the divine
life, the abandonment of all dharmas, \s{sarvadharm\=an}, to take refuge in the
Supreme alone, and the divine activity of a Buddha, a Ramakrishna, a
Vivekananda is perfectly in consonance with this teaching. Nay, although the
Gita prefers action to inaction, it does not rule out the renunciation of works,
but accepts it as one of the ways to the Divine. If that can only be attained
by renouncing works and life and all duties and the call is strong within us,
then into the bonfire they must go, and there is no help for it. The call of God
is imperative and cannot be weighed against any other considerations.
\par But here there is this farther difficulty that the action which Arjuna must
do is one from which his moral sense recoils. It is his duty to fight, you say?
But that duty has now become to his mind a terrible sin. How does it help him
or solve his difficulty, to tell him that he must do his duty disinterestedly,
dispassionately? He will want to know which is his duty or how it can be his
duty to destroy in a sanguinary massacre his kin, his race and his country. He
is told that he has right on his side, but that does not and cannot satisfy him,
because his very point is that the justice of his legal claim does not justify him
in supporting it by a pitiless massacre destructive to the future of his nation.
Is he then to act dispassionately in the sense of not caring whether it is a sin
or what its consequences may be so long as he does his duty as a soldier?
That may be the teaching of a State, of politicians, of lawyers, of ethical
casuists; it can never be the teaching of a great religious and philosophical
Scripture which sets out to solve the problem of life and action from the
Page 33

very roots. And if that is what the Gita has to say on a most poignant moral
and spiritual problem, we must put it out of the list of the world's Scriptures
and thrust it, if anywhere, then into our library of political science and ethical
casuistry.
\par Undoubtedly, the Gita does, like the Upanishads, teach the equality
which rises above sin and virtue, beyond good and evil, but only as a part of
the Brahmic consciousness and for the man who is on the path and advanced
enough to fulfil the supreme rule. It does not preach indifference to good and
evil for the ordinary life of man, where such a doctrine would have the most
pernicious consequences. On the contrary it affirms that the doers of evil
shall not attain to God. Therefore if Arjuna simply seeks to fulfil in the best
way the ordinary law of man's life, disinterested performance of what he
feels to be a sin, a thing of Hell, will not help him, even though that sin be his
duty as a soldier. He must refrain from what his conscience abhors though a
thousand duties were shattered to pieces.
\par We must remember that duty is an idea which in practice rests upon
social conceptions. We may extend the term beyond its proper connotation
and talk of our duty to ourselves or we may, if we like, say in a transcendent
sense that it was Buddha's duty to abandon all, or even that it is the ascetic's
duty to sit motionless in a cave! But this is obviously to play with words. Duty
is a relative term and depends upon our relation to others. It is a father's duty,
as a father, to nurture and educate his children; a lawyer's to do his best for
his client even if he knows him to be guilty and his defence to be a lie; a
soldier's to fight and shoot to order even if he kill his own kin and
countrymen; a judge's to send the guilty to prison and hang the murderer.
And so long as these positions are accepted, the duty remains clear, a
practical matter of course even when it is not a point of honour or affection,
and overrides the absolute religious or moral law. But what if the inner view
is changed, if the lawyer is awakened to the absolute sinfulness of falsehood,
the judge becomes convinced that capital punishment is a crime against
humanity, the man called upon to the battlefield feels, like the conscientious
objector of today or as a Tolstoy would feel, that
Page 34

in no circumstances is it permissible to take human life any more than to eat
human flesh? It is obvious that here the moral law which is above all relative
duties must prevail; and that law depends on no social relation or conception
of duty but on the awakened inner perception of man, the moral being.
\par There are in the world, in fact, two different laws of conduct each valid
on its own plane, the rule principally dependent on external status and the rule
independent of status and entirely dependent on the thought and conscience.
The Gita does not teach us to subordinate the higher plane to the lower, it
does not ask the awakened moral consciousness to slay itself on the altar of
duty as a sacrifice and victim to the law of the social status. It calls us higher
and not lower; from the conflict of the two planes it bids us ascend to a
supreme poise above the mainly practical, above the purely ethical, to the
Brahmic consciousness. It replaces the conception of social duty by a divine
obligation. The subjection to external law gives place to a certain principle of
inner self-determination of action proceeding by the soul's freedom from the
tangled law of works. And this, as we shall see,—the Brahmic
consciousness, the soul's freedom from works and the determination of
works in the nature by the Lord within and above us,—is the kernel of the
Gita's teaching with regard to action.
\par The Gita can only be understood, like any other great work of the kind,
by studying it in its entirety and as a developing argument. But the modern
interpreters, starting from the great writer Bankim Chandra Chatterji who
first gave to the Gita this new sense of a Gospel of Duty, have laid an almost
exclusive stress on the first three or four chapters and in those on the idea of
equality, on the expression \s{kartavya\.m karma}, the work that is to be done,
which they render by duty, and on the phrase “Thou hast a right to action, but
none to the fruits of action” which is now popularly quoted as the great word,
\s{mah\=av\=akya}, of the Gita. The rest of the eighteen chapters with their high
philosophy are given a secondary importance, except indeed the great vision
in the eleventh. This is natural enough for the modern mind which is, or has
been till yesterday, inclined to be impatient of
Page 35

metaphysical subtleties and far-off spiritual seekings, eager to get to work
and, like Arjuna himself, mainly concerned for a workable law of works, a
\s{dharma}. But it is the wrong way to handle this Scripture.
\par The equality which the Gita preaches is not disinterestedness,—the great
command to Arjuna given {\it after} the foundation and main structure of the
teaching have been laid and built, “Arise, slay thy enemies, enjoy a
prosperous kingdom,” has not the ring of an uncompromising altruism or of a
white, dispassionate abnegation; it is a state of inner poise and wideness
which is the foundation of spiritual freedom. With that poise, in that freedom
we have to do the “work that is to be done,” a phrase which the Gita uses
with the greatest wideness including in it all works, \s{sarvakarm\=a\,ni}, and
which far exceeds, though it may include, social duties or ethical obligations.
What is the work to be done is not to be determined by the individual choice;
nor is the right to the action and the rejection of claim to the fruit the great
word of the Gita, but only a preliminary word governing the first state of the
disciple when he begins ascending the hill of Yoga. It is practically
superseded at a subsequent stage. For the Gita goes on to affirm
emphatically that the man is not the doer of the action; it is Prakriti, it is
Nature, it is the great Force with its three modes of action that works through
him, and he must learn to see that it is {\it not} he who does the work.
Therefore the “right to action” is an idea which is only valid so long as we
are still under the illusion of being the doer; it must necessarily disappear
from the mind like the claim to the fruit, as soon as we cease to be to our
own consciousness the doer of our works. All pragmatic egoism, whether of
the claim to fruits or of the right to action, is then at an end.
\par But the determinism of Prakriti is not the last word of the Gita. The
equality of the will and the rejection of fruits are only means for entering with
the mind and the heart and the understanding into the divine consciousness
and living in it; and the Gita expressly says that they are to be employed as a
means as long as the disciple is unable so to live or even to seek by practice
the gradual development of this higher state. And
Page 36

what is this Divine, whom Krishna declares himself to be? It is the
Purushottama beyond the Self that acts not, beyond the Prakriti that acts,
foundation of the one, master of the other, the Lord of whom all is the
manifestation, who even in our present subjection to Maya sits in the heart of
His creatures governing the works of Prakriti, He by whom the armies on the
field of Kurukshetra have already been slain while yet they live and who uses
Arjuna only as an instrument or immediate occasion of this great slaughter.
Prakriti is only His executive force. The disciple has to rise beyond this Force
and its three modes or \s{gu\,nas}; he has to become \s{trigu\,n\=at\=ita}. Not to
her has he to surrender his actions, over which he has no longer any claim or
“right”, but into the being of the Supreme. Reposing his mind and
understanding, heart and will in Him, with self-knowledge, with
God-knowledge, with world-knowledge, with a perfect equality, a perfect
devotion, an absolute self-giving, he has to do works as an offering to the
Master of all self-energisings and all sacrifice. Identified in will, conscious
with that consciousness, That shall decide and initiate the action. This is the
solution which the Divine Teacher offers to the disciple.
\par What the great, the supreme word of the Gita is, its \s{mah\=av\=akya}, we
have not to seek; for the Gita itself declares it in its last utterance, the
crowning note of the great diapason. “With the Lord in thy heart take refuge
with all thy being; by His grace thou shalt attain to the supreme peace and
the eternal status. So have I expounded to thee a knowledge more secret
than that which is hidden. Further hear the most secret, the supreme word
that I shall speak to thee. Become my-minded, devoted to Me, to Me do
sacrifice and adoration; infallibly, thou shalt come to Me, for dear to me art
thou. Abandoning all laws of conduct seek refuge in Me alone. I will release
thee from all sin; do not grieve.”
\par The argument of the Gita resolves itself into three great steps by which
action rises out of the human into the divine plane leaving the bondage of the
lower for the liberty of a higher law. First, by the renunciation of desire and a
perfect equality works have to be done as a sacrifice by man as the doer, a
sacrifice to
Page 37

a deity who is the supreme and only Self though by him not yet realised in his
own being. This is the initial step. Secondly, not only the desire of the fruit,
but the claim to be the doer of works has to be renounced in the realisation of
the Self as the equal, the inactive, the immutable principle and of all works as
simply the operation of universal Force, of the Nature-Soul, Prakriti, the
unequal, active, mutable power. Lastly, the supreme Self has to be seen as
the supreme Purusha governing this Prakriti, of whom the soul in Nature is a
partial manifestation, by whom all works are directed, in a perfect
transcendence, through Nature. To him love and adoration and the sacrifice
of works have to be offered; the whole being has to be surrendered to Him
and the whole consciousness raised up to dwell in this divine consciousness
so that the human soul may share in His divine transcendence of Nature and
of His works and act in a perfect spiritual liberty.
\par The first step is Karmayoga, the selfless sacrifice of works, and here the
Gita's insistence is on action. The second is Jnanayoga, the self-realisation
and knowledge of the true nature of the self and the world; and here the
insistence is on knowledge; but the sacrifice of works continues and the path
of Works becomes one with but does not disappear into the path of
Knowledge. The last step is Bhaktiyoga, adoration and seeking of the
supreme Self as the Divine Being, and here the insistence is on devotion; but
the knowledge is not subordinated, only raised, vitalised and fulfilled, and still
the sacrifice of works continues; the double path becomes the triune way of
knowledge, works and devotion. And the fruit of the sacrifice, the one fruit
still placed before the seeker, is attained, union with the divine Being and
oneness with the supreme divine nature.
Page 38

\par
\HN V
\par
\ht Kurukshetra
\par\drop Before we can proceed, following in the large steps of the Teacher
of the Gita, to watch his tracing of the triune path of man,—the path which is
that of his will, heart, thought raising themselves to the Highest and into the
being of that which is the supreme object of all action, love and knowledge,
we must consider once more the situation from which the Gita arises, but
now in its largest bearings as a type of human life and even of all
world-existence. For although Arjuna is himself concerned only with his own
situation, his inner struggle and the law of action he must follow, yet, as we
have seen, the particular question he raises, in the manner in which he raises
it, does really bring up the whole question of human life and action, what the
world is and why it is and how possibly, it being what it is, life here in the
world can be reconciled with life in the Spirit. And all this deep and difficult
matter the Teacher insists on resolving as the very foundation of his
command to an action which must proceed from a new poise of being and by
the light of a liberating knowledge.
\par But what, then, is it that makes the difficulty for the man who has to take
the world as it is and act in it and yet would live, within, the spiritual life?
What is this aspect of existence which appals his awakened mind and brings
about what the title of the first chapter of the Gita calls significantly the Yoga
of the dejection of Arjuna, the dejection and discouragement felt by the
human being when he is forced to face the spectacle of the universe as it
really is with the veil of the ethical illusion, the illusion of self-righteousness
torn from his eyes, before a higher reconciliation with himself is effected? It
is that aspect which is figured outwardly in the carnage and massacre of
Kurukshetra and spiritually by the vision of the Lord of all things as Time
arising to devour and destroy the creatures whom it has made.
Page 39

This is the vision of the Lord of all existence as the universal Creator but also
the universal Destroyer, of whom the ancient Scripture can say in a ruthless
image, “The sages and the heroes are his food and death is the spice of his
banquet.” It is one and the same truth seen first indirectly and obscurely in
the facts of life and then directly and clearly in the soul's vision of that which
manifests itself in life. The outward aspect is that of world-existence and
human existence proceeding by struggle and slaughter; the inward aspect is
that of the universal Being fulfilling himself in a vast creation and a vast
destruction. Life a battle and a field of death, this is Kurukshetra; God the
Terrible, this is the vision that Arjuna sees on that field of massacre.
\par War, said Heraclitus, is the father of all things, War is the king of all; and
the saying, like most of the apophthegms of the Greek thinker, suggests a
profound truth. From a clash of material or other forces everything in this
world, if not the world itself, seems to be born; by a struggle of forces,
tendencies, principles, beings it seems to proceed, ever creating new things,
ever destroying the old, marching one knows not very well whither,—to a
final self-destruction, say some; in an unending series of vain cycles, say
others; in progressive cycles, is the most optimistic conclusion, leading
through whatever trouble and apparent confusion towards a higher and higher
approximation to some divine apocalypse. However that may be, this is
certain that there is not only no construction here without destruction, no
harmony except by a poise of contending forces won out of many actual and
potential discords, but also no continued existence of life except by a constant
self-feeding and devouring of other life. Our very bodily life is a constant
dying and being reborn, the body itself a beleaguered city attacked by
assailing, protected by defending forces whose business is to devour each
other: and this is only a type of all our existence. The command seems to
have gone out from the beginning, “Thou shalt not conquer except by battle
with thy fellows and thy surroundings; thou shalt not even live except by
battle and struggle and by absorbing into thyself other life. The first law of
this world that I have made is creation and preservation by destruction.”
Page 40

\par Ancient thought accepted this starting-point so far as it could see it by
scrutiny of the universe. The old Upanishads saw it very clearly and phrased
it with an uncompromising thoroughness which will have nothing to do with
any honeyed glosses or optimistic scuttlings of the truth. Hunger that is
Death, they said, is the creator and master of this world, and they figured
vital existence in the image of the Horse of the sacrifice. Matter they
described by a name which means ordinarily food and they said, we call it
food because it is devoured and devours creatures. The eater eating is eaten,
this is the formula of the material world, as the Darwinians rediscovered
when they laid it down that the struggle for life is the law of evolutionary
existence. Modern science has only rephrased the old truths that had already
been expressed in much more forcible, wide and accurate formulas by the
apophthegm of Heraclitus and the figures employed by the Upanishads.
\par Nietzsche's insistence upon war as an aspect of life and the ideal man as
a warrior,—the camel-man he may be to begin with and the child-man
hereafter, but the lion-man he must become in the middle, if he is to attain his
perfection,—these now much-decried theories of Nietzsche have, however
much we may differ from many of the moral and practical conclusions he
drew from them, their undeniable justification and recall us to a truth we like
to hide out of sight. It is good that we should be reminded of it; first, because
to see it has for every strong soul a tonic effect which saves us from the
flabbiness and relaxation encouraged by a too mellifluous philosophic,
religious or ethical sentimentalism, that which loves to look upon Nature as
love and life and beauty and good, but turns away from her grim mask of
death, adoring God as Shiva but refusing to adore him as Rudra; secondly,
because unless we have the honesty and courage to look existence straight in
the face, we shall never arrive at any effective solution of its discords and
oppositions. We must see first what life and the world are; afterwards, we
can all the better set about finding the right way to transform them into what
they should be. If this repellent aspect of existence holds in itself some secret
of the final harmony, we shall by
Page 41

ignoring or belittling it miss that secret and all our efforts at a solution will fail
by fault of our self-indulgent ignoring of the true elements of the problem. If,
on the other hand, it is an enemy to be beaten down, trampled on, excised,
eliminated, still we gain nothing by underrating its power and hold upon life or
refusing to see how firmly it is rooted in the effective past and the actually
operative principles of existence.
\par War and destruction are not only a universal principle of our life here in
its purely material aspects, but also of our mental and moral existence. It is
self-evident that in the actual life of man intellectual, social, political, moral
we can make no real step forward without a struggle, a battle between what
exists and lives and what seeks to exist and live and between all that stands
behind either. It is impossible, at least as men and things are, to advance, to
grow, to fulfil and still to observe really and utterly that principle of
harmlessness which is yet placed before us as the highest and best law of
conduct. We will use only soul-force and never destroy by war or any even
defensive employment of physical violence? Good, though until soul-force is
effective, the Asuric force in men and nations tramples down, breaks,
slaughters, burns, pollutes, as we see it doing today, but then at its ease and
unhindered, and you have perhaps caused as much destruction of life by your
abstinence as others by resort to violence; still you have set up an ideal which
may some day and at any rate ought to lead up to better things. But even
soul-force, when it is effective, destroys. Only those who have used it with
eyes open, know how much more terrible and destructive it is than the sword
and the cannon; and only those who do not limit their view to the act and its
immediate results, can see how tremendous are its after-effects, how much is
eventually destroyed and with that much all the life that depended on it and
fed upon it. Evil cannot perish without the destruction of much that lives by
the evil, and it is no less destruction even if we personally are saved the pain
of a sensational act of violence.
\par Moreover, every time we use soul-force we raise a great force of
Karma against our adversary, the after-movements of which we have no
power to control. Vasishtha uses soul-force
Page 42

against the military violence of Vishwamitra and armies of Huns and Shakas
and Pallavas hurl themselves on the aggressor. The very quiescence and
passivity of the spiritual man under violence and aggression awakens the
tremendous forces of the world to a retributive action; and it may even be
more merciful to stay in their path, though by force, those who represent evil
than to allow them to trample on until they call down on themselves a worse
destruction than we would ever think of inflicting. It is not enough that our
own hands should remain clean and our souls unstained for the law of strife
and destruction to die out of the world; that which is its root must first
disappear out of humanity. Much less will mere immobility and inertia
unwilling to use or incapable of using any kind of resistance to evil, abrogate
the law; inertia, tamas, indeed, injures much more than can the rajasic
principle of strife which at least creates more than it destroys. Therefore, so
far as the problem of the individual's action goes, his abstention from strife
and its inevitable concomitant destruction in their more gross and physical
form may help his own moral being, but it leaves the Slayer of creatures
unabolished.
\par For the rest the whole of human history bears witness to the inexorable
vitality and persistent prevalence of this principle in the world. It is natural
that we should attempt to palliate, to lay stress on other aspects. Strife and
destruction are not all; there is the saving principle of association and mutual
help as well as the force of dissociation and mutual strife; a power of love no
less than a power of egoistic self-assertion; an impulse to sacrifice ourselves
for others as well as the impulse to sacrifice others to ourselves. But when
we see how these have actually worked, we shall not be tempted to gloss
over or ignore the power of their opposites. Association has been worked not
only for mutual help, but at the same time for defence and aggression, to
strengthen us against all that attacks or resists in the struggle for life.
Association itself has been a servant of war, egoism and the self-assertion of
life against life. Love itself has been constantly a power of death. Especially
the love of good and the love of God, as embraced by the human ego, have
been responsible for
Page 43

much strife, slaughter and destruction. Self-sacrifice is great and noble, but at
its highest it is an acknowledgment of the law of Life by death and becomes
an offering on the altar of some Power that demands a victim in order that
the work desired may be done. The mother bird facing the animal of prey in
defence of its young, the patriot dying for his country's freedom, the religious
martyr or the martyr of an idea, these in the lower and the superior scale of
animal life are highest examples of self-sacrifice, and it is evident to what
they bear witness.
\par But if we look at after results, an easy optimism becomes even less
possible. See the patriot dying in order that his country may be free, and mark
that country a few decades after the Lord of Karma has paid the price of the
blood and the suffering that was given; you shall see it in its turn an
oppressor, an exploiter and conqueror of colonies and dependencies
devouring others that it may live and succeed aggressively in life. The
Christian martyrs perish in their thousands, setting soul-force against
empire-force that Christ may conquer, Christianity prevail. Soul-force does
triumph, Christianity does prevail,—but not Christ; the victorious religion
becomes a militant and dominant Church and a more fanatically persecuting
power than the creed and the empire which it replaced. The very religions
organise themselves into powers of mutual strife and battle together fiercely
to live, to grow, to possess the world.
\par All which seems to show that here is an element in existence, perhaps
the initial element, which we do not know how to conquer either because it
cannot be conquered or because we have not looked at it with a strong and
impartial gaze so as to recognise it calmly and fairly and know what it is. We
must look existence in the face if our aim is to arrive at a right solution,
whatever that solution may be. And to look existence in the face is to look
God in the face; for the two cannot be separated, nor the responsibility for
the laws of world-existence be shifted away from Him who created them or
from That which constituted it. Yet here too we love to palliate and
equivocate. We erect a God of Love and Mercy, a God of good, a God just,
righteous and virtuous according to our own moral conceptions
Page 44

of justice, virtue and righteousness, and all the rest, we say, is not He or is not
His, but was made by some diabolical Power which He suffered for some
reason to work out its wicked will or by some dark Ahriman counterbalancing
our gracious Ormuzd, or was even the fault of selfish and sinful man who has
spoiled what was made originally perfect by God. As if man had created the
law of death and devouring in the animal world or that tremendous process
by which Nature creates indeed and preserves but in the same step and by
the same inextricable action slays and destroys. It is only a few religions
which have had the courage to say without any reserve, like the Indian, that
this enigmatic World-Power is one Deity, one Trinity, to lift up the image of
the Force that acts in the world in the figure not only of the beneficent Durga,
but of the terrible Kali in her blood-stained dance of destruction and to say,
“This too is the Mother; this also know to be God; this too, if thou hast the
strength, adore.” And it is significant that the religion which has had this
unflinching honesty and tremendous courage, has succeeded in creating a
profound and wide-spread spirituality such as no other can parallel. For truth
is the foundation of real spirituality and courage is its soul. \s{Tasyai satyam
\=ayatanam.}
\par All this is not to say that strife and destruction are the alpha and omega
of existence, that harmony is not greater than war, love more the manifest
divine than death or that we must not move towards the replacement of
physical force by soul-force, of war by peace, of strife by union, of devouring
by love, of egoism by universality, of death by immortal life. God is not only
the Destroyer, but the Friend of creatures; not only the cosmic Trinity, but the
Transcendent; the terrible Kali is also the loving and beneficent Mother; the
lord of Kurukshetra is the divine comrade and charioteer, the attracter of
beings, incarnate Krishna. And whithersoever he is driving through all the
strife and clash and confusion, to whatever goal or godhead he may be
attracting us, it is—no doubt of that—to some transcendence of all these
aspects upon which we have been so firmly insisting. But where, how, with
what kind of transcendence, under what conditions, this we have to discover;
and to discover it, the first
Page 45

necessity is to see the world as it is, to observe and value rightly his action as
it reveals itself at the start and now; afterwards the way and the goal will
better reveal themselves. We must acknowledge Kurukshetra; we must
submit to the law of Life by Death before we can find our way to the life
immortal; we must open our eyes, with a less appalled gaze than Arjuna's, to
the vision of our Lord of Time and Death and cease to deny, hate or recoil
from the universal Destroyer.
Page 46

\par
\HN VI
\par
\ht Man and the Battle of Life
\par\drop Thus, if we are to appreciate in its catholicity the teaching of the
Gita, we must accept intellectually its standpoint and courageous envisaging
of the manifest nature and process of the world. The divine charioteer of
Kurukshetra reveals himself on one side as the Lord of all the worlds and the
Friend and omniscient Guide of all creatures, on the other as Time the
Destroyer “arisen for the destruction of these peoples.” The Gita, following in
this the spirit of the catholic Hindu religion, affirms this also as God; it does
not attempt to evade the enigma of the world by escaping from it through a
side-door. If, in fact, we do not regard existence merely as the mechanic
action of a brute and indifferent material Force or, on the other hand, as an
equally mechanical play of ideas and energies arising out of an original
Non-Existence or else reflected in the passive Soul or the evolution of a
dream or nightmare in the surface consciousness of an indifferent, immutable
Transcendence which is unaffected by the dream and has no real part in
it,—if we accept at all, as the Gita accepts, the existence of God, that is to
say of the omnipresent, omniscient, omnipotent, yet always transcendent
Being who manifests the world and Himself in the world, who is not the slave
but the lord of His creative Consciousness, Nature or Force (Maya, Prakriti
or Shakti), who is not baffled or thwarted in His world-conception or design
by His creatures, man or devil, who does not need to justify Himself by
shifting the responsibility for any part of His creation or manifestation on that
which is created or manifested, then the human being has to start from a
great, a difficult act of faith. Finding himself in a world which is apparently a
chaos of battling powers, a clash of vast and obscure forces, a life which
subsists only by constant change and death, menaced from every side by
pain, suffering, evil and destruction, he has to see the omnipresent
Page 47

Deity in it all and conscious that of this enigma there must be a solution and
beyond this Ignorance in which he dwells a Knowledge that reconciles, he
has to take his stand upon this faith, “Though Thou slay me, yet will I trust in
Thee.” All human thought or faith that is active and affirmative, whether it be
theistic, pantheistic or atheistic, does in fact involve more or less explicitly and
completely such an attitude. It admits and it believes: admits the discords of
the world, believes in some highest principle of God, universal Being or
Nature which shall enable us to transcend, overcome or harmonise these
discords, perhaps even to do all three at once, to harmonise by overcoming
and transcending.
\par Then, as to human life in its actualities, we have to accept its aspect of a
struggle and a battle mounting into supreme crises such as that of
Kurukshetra. The Gita, as we have seen, takes for its frame such a period of
transition and crisis as humanity periodically experiences in its history, in
which great forces clash together for a huge destruction and reconstruction,
intellectual, social, moral, religious, political, and these in the actual
psychological and social stage of human evolution culminate usually through a
violent physical convulsion of strife, war or revolution. The Gita proceeds
from the acceptance of the necessity in Nature for such vehement crises and
it accepts not only the moral aspect, the struggle between righteousness and
unrighteousness, between the self-affirming law of Good and the forces that
oppose its progression, but also the physical aspect, the actual armed war or
other vehement physical strife between the human beings who represent the
antagonistic powers. We must remember that the Gita was composed at a
time when war was even more than it is now a necessary part of human
activity and the idea of its elimination from the scheme of life would have
been an absolute chimera. The gospel of universal peace and goodwill among
men—for without a universal and entire mutual goodwill there can be no real
and abiding peace—has never succeeded for a moment in possessing itself of
human life during the historic cycle of our progress, because morally, socially,
spiritually the race was not prepared and the poise of
Page 48

Nature in its evolution would not admit of its being immediately prepared for
any such transcendence. Even now we have not actually progressed beyond
the feasibility of a system of accommodation between conflicting interests
which may minimise the recurrence of the worst forms of strife. And
towards this consummation the method, the approach which humanity has
been forced by its own nature to adopt, is a monstrous mutual massacre
unparalleled in history; a universal war, full of bitterness and irreconcilable
hatred, is the straight way and the triumphant means modern man has found
for the establishment of universal peace! That consummation, too, founded
not upon any fundamental change in human nature, but upon intellectual
notions, economic convenience, vital and sentimental shrinkings from the loss
of life, discomfort and horror of war, effected by nothing better than political
adjustments, gives no very certain promise of firm foundation and long
duration. A day may come, must surely come, we will say, when humanity
will be ready spiritually, morally, socially for the reign of universal peace;
meanwhile the aspect of battle and the nature and function of man as a
fighter have to be accepted and accounted for by any practical philosophy
and religion. The Gita, taking life as it is and not only as it may be in some
distant future, puts the question how this aspect and function of life, which is
really an aspect and function of human activity in general, can be harmonised
with the spiritual existence.
\par The Gita is therefore addressed to a fighter, a man of action, one whose
duty in life is that of war and protection, war as a part of government for the
protection of those who are excused from that duty, debarred from protecting
themselves and therefore at the mercy of the strong and the violent, war,
secondly and by a moral extension of this idea, for the protection of the weak
and the oppressed and for the maintenance of right and justice in the world.
For all these ideas, the social and practical, the moral and the chivalrous enter
into the Indian conception of the Kshatriya, the man who is a warrior and
ruler by function and a knight and king in his nature. Although the more
general and universal ideas of the Gita are those which are the most
Page 49

important to us, we ought not to leave out of consideration altogether the
colouring and trend they take from the peculiar Indian culture and social
system in the midst of which they arose. That system differed from the
modern in its conception. To the modern mind man is a thinker, worker or
producer and a fighter all in one, and the tendency of the social system is to
lump all these activities and to demand from each individual his contribution to
the intellectual, economical and military life and needs of the community
without paying any heed to the demands of his individual nature and
temperament. The ancient Indian civilisation laid peculiar stress on the
individual nature, tendency, temperament and sought to determine by it the
ethical type, function and place in the society. Nor did it consider man
primarily as a social being or the fullness of his social existence as the highest
ideal, but rather as a spiritual being in process of formation and development
and his social life, ethical law, play of temperament and exercise of function
as means and stages of spiritual formation. Thought and knowledge, war and
government, production and distribution, labour and service were carefully
differentiated functions of society, each assigned to those who were naturally
called to it and providing the right means by which they could individually
proceed towards their spiritual development and self-perfection.
\par The modern idea of a common obligation in all the main departments of
human activity has its advantages; it helps to greater solidarity, unity and
fullness in the life of the community and a more all-round development of the
complete human being as opposed to the endless divisions and
over-specialisation and the narrowing and artificial shackling of the life of the
individual to which the Indian system eventually led. But it has also its
disadvantages and in certain of its developments the too logical application of
it has led to grotesque and disastrous absurdities. This is evident enough in
the character of modern war. From the idea of a common military obligation
binding on every individual to defend and fight for the community by which he
lives and profits, has arisen the system by which the whole manhood of the
nation is hurled into the bloody trench to slay
Page 50

and be slain, thinkers, artists, philosophers, priests, merchants, artisans all torn
from their natural functions, the whole life of the community disorganised,
reason and conscience overridden, even the minister of religion who is
salaried by the State or called by his function to preach the gospel of peace
and love forced to deny his creed and become a butcher of his fellow-men!
Not only are conscience and nature violated by the arbitrary fiat of the
military State, but national defence carried to an insane extreme makes its
best attempt to become a national suicide.
\par Indian civilisation on the contrary made it its chief aim to minimise the
incidence and disaster of war. For this purpose it limited the military
obligation to the small class who by their birth, nature and traditions were
marked out for this function and found in it their natural means of
self-development through the flowering of the soul in the qualities of courage,
disciplined force, strong helpfulness and chivalrous nobility for which the
warrior's life pursued under the stress of a high ideal gives a field and
opportunities. The rest of the community was in every way guarded from
slaughter and outrage; their life and occupations were as little interfered with
as possible and the combative and destructive tendencies of human nature
were given a restricted field, confined in a sort of lists so as to do the
minimum amount of harm to the general life of the race, while at the same
time by being subjected to high ethical ideals and every possible rule of
humanity and chivalry the function of war was obliged to help in ennobling
and elevating instead of brutalising those who performed it. It must be
remembered that it is war of this kind and under these conditions that the Gita
had in view, war considered as an inevitable part of human life, but so
restricted and regulated as to serve like other activities the ethical and
spiritual development which was then regarded as the whole real object of
life, war destructive within certain carefully fixed limits of the bodily life of
individual men but constructive of their inner life and of the ethical elevation
of the race. That war in the past has, when subjected to an ideal, helped in
this elevation, as in the development of knighthood and chivalry, the
Page 51

Indian ideal of the Kshatriya, the Japanese ideal of the Samurai, can only be
denied by the fanatics of pacifism. When it has fulfilled its function, it may
well disappear; for if it tries to survive its utility, it will appear as an
unrelieved brutality of violence stripped of its ideal and constructive aspects
and will be rejected by the progressive mind of humanity; but its past service
to the race must be admitted in any reasonable view of our evolution.
\par The physical fact of war, however, is only a special and outward
manifestation of a general principle in life and the Kshatriya is only the
outward manifestation and type of a general characteristic necessary to the
completeness of human perfection. War typifies and embodies physically the
aspect of battle and struggle which belongs to all life, both to our inner and
our outer living, in a world whose method is a meeting and wrestling of forces
which progress by mutual destruction towards a continually changing
adjustment expressive of a progressive harmonising and hopeful of a perfect
harmony based upon some yet ungrasped potentiality of oneness. The
Kshatriya is the type and embodiment of the fighter in man who accepts this
principle in life and faces it as a warrior striving towards mastery, not
shrinking from the destruction of bodies and forms, but through it all aiming at
the realisation of some principle of right, justice, law which shall be the basis
of the harmony towards which the struggle tends. The Gita accepts this
aspect of the world-energy and the physical fact of war which embodies it,
and it addresses itself to the man of action, the striver and fighter, the
Kshatriya,—war which is the extreme contradiction of the soul's high
aspiration to peace within and harmlessness
\note{\s{ahi\.ms\=a.}} without, the striver and fighter whose necessary turmoil
of struggle and action seems to be the very contradiction of the soul's high
ideal of calm mastery and self-possession,—and it seeks for an issue from
the contradiction, a point at which its terms meet and a poise which shall be
the first essential basis of harmony and transcendence.
Page 52

\par Man meets the battle of life in the manner most consonant with the
essential quality most dominant in his nature. There are, according to the
Sankhya philosophy accepted in this respect by the Gita, three essential
qualities or modes of the world-energy and therefore also of human nature,
\s{sattva}, the mode of poise, knowledge and satisfaction, \s{rajas}, the
mode of passion, action and struggling emotion, \s{tamas}, the mode of
ignorance and inertia. Dominated by \s{tamas}, man does not so much meet
the rush and shock of the world-energies whirling about him and converging
upon him as he succumbs to them, is overborne by them, afflicted, subjected;
or at the most, helped by the other qualities, the tamasic man seeks only
somehow to survive, to subsist so long as he may, to shelter himself in the
fortress of an established routine of thought and action in which he feels
himself to a certain extent protected from the battle, able to reject the
demand which his higher nature makes upon him, excused from accepting the
necessity of farther struggle and the ideal of an increasing effort and
mastery. Dominated by \s{rajas}, man flings himself into the battle and
attempts to use the struggle of forces for his own egoistic benefit, to slay,
conquer, dominate, enjoy; or, helped by a certain measure of the sattwic
quality, the rajasic man makes the struggle itself a means of increasing inner
mastery, joy, power, possession. The battle of life becomes his delight and
passion partly for its own sake, for the pleasure of activity and the sense of
power, partly as a means of his increase and natural self-development.
Dominated by \s{sattva}, man seeks in the midst of the strife for a principle
of law, right, poise, harmony, peace, satisfaction. The purely sattwic man
tends to seek this within, whether for himself alone or with an impulse to
communicate it, when won, to other human minds, but usually by a sort of
inner detachment from or else an outer rejection of the strife and turmoil of
the active world-energy; but if the sattwic mind accepts partly the rajasic
impulse, it seeks rather to impose this poise and harmony upon the struggle
and apparent chaos, to vindicate a victory for peace, love and harmony over
the principle of war, discord and struggle. All the attitudes adopted by the
human mind towards the problem of life either
Page 53

derive from the domination of one or other of these qualities or else from an
attempt at balance and harmony between them.
\par But there comes also a stage in which the mind recoils from the whole
problem and, dissatisfied with the solutions given by the threefold mode of
Nature, \s{traigu\,nya}, seeks for some higher solution outside of it or else
above it. It looks for an escape either into something which is outside and
void of all qualities and therefore of all activity or in something which is
superior to the three qualities and master of them and therefore at once
capable of action and unaffected, undominated by its own action, in the
\s{nirgu\,na} or the \s{trigu\,n\=at\=ita}. It aspires to an absolute peace and
unconditioned existence or to a dominant calm and superior existence. The
natural movement of the former attitude is towards the renunciation of the
world, \s{sanny\=asa}; of the latter towards superiority to the claims of the
lower nature and its whirl of actions and reactions, and its principle is equality
and the inner renunciation of passion and desire. The former is the first
impulse of Arjuna recoiling from the calamitous culmination of all his heroic
activity in the great cataclysm of battle and massacre, Kurukshetra; losing his
whole past principle of action, inaction and the rejection of life and its claims
seem to him the only issue. But it is to an inner superiority and not to the
physical renunciation of life and action that he is called by the voice of the
divine Teacher.
\par Arjuna is the Kshatriya, the rajasic man who governs his rajasic action
by a high sattwic ideal. He advances to this gigantic struggle, to this
Kurukshetra with the full acceptance of the joy of battle, as to “a holiday of
fight”, but with a proud confidence in the righteousness of his cause; he
advances in his rapid chariot tearing the hearts of his enemies with the
victorious clamour of his war-conch; for he wishes to look upon all these
Kings of men who have come here to champion against him the cause of
unrighteousness and establish as a rule of life the disregard of law, justice and
truth which they would replace by the rule of a selfish and arrogant egoism.
When this confidence is shattered within him, when he is smitten down from
his customary attitude and mental basis of life, it is by the uprush of the
tamasic quality into
Page 54

the rajasic man, inducing a recoil of astonishment, grief, horror, dismay,
dejection, bewilderment of the mind and the war of reason against itself, a
collapse towards the principle of ignorance and inertia. As a result he turns
towards renunciation. Better the life of the mendicant living upon alms than
this \s{dharma} of the Kshatriya, this battle and action culminating in
undiscriminating massacre, this principle of mastery and glory and power
which can only be won by destruction and bloodshed, this conquest of
blood-stained enjoyments, this vindication of justice and right by a means
which contradicts all righteousness and this affirmation of the social law by a
war which destroys in its process and result all that constitutes society.
\par\s{Sanny\=asa} is the renunciation of life and action and of the threefold
modes of Nature, but it has to be approached through one or other of the
three qualities. The impulse may be tamasic, a feeling of impotence, fear,
aversion, disgust, horror of the world and life; or it may be the rajasic quality
tending towards tamas, an impulse of weariness of the struggle, grief,
disappointment, refusal to accept any longer this vain turmoil of activity with
its pains and its eternal discontent. Or the impulse may be that of rajas
tending towards sattwa, the impulse to arrive at something superior to
anything life can give, to conquer a higher state, to trample down life itself
under the feet of an inner strength which seeks to break all bonds and
transcend all limits. Or it may be sattwic, an intellectual perception of the
vanity of life and the absence of any real goal or justification for this
ever-cycling world-existence or else a spiritual perception of the Timeless,
the Infinite, the Silent, the nameless and formless Peace beyond. The recoil
of Arjuna is the tamasic recoil from action of the sattwa-rajasic man. The
Teacher may confirm it in its direction, using it as a dark entry to the purity
and peace of the ascetic life; or he may purify it at once and raise it towards
the rare altitudes of the sattwic tendency of renunciation. In fact, he does
neither. He discourages the tamasic recoil and the tendency to renunciation
and enjoins the continuance of action and even of the same fierce and terrible
action, but he points the disciple towards another and inner renunciation
which is the real issue from his crisis and the way towards the soul's
superiority to the world-Nature and yet its calm and self-possessed action in
the world. Not a physical asceticism, but an inner askesis is the teaching of
the Gita.
Page 55

\par
\HN VII
\par
\ht The Creed of the Aryan Fighter
\note{Gita, II. 1-38.}
\par\drop The answer of the divine Teacher to the first flood of Arjuna's
passionate self-questioning, his shrinking from slaughter, his sense of sorrow
and sin, his grieving for an empty and desolate life, his forecast of evil results
of an evil deed, is a strongly-worded rebuke. All this, it is replied, is confusion
of mind and delusion, a weakness of the heart, an unmanliness, a fall from the
virility of the fighter and the hero. Not this was fitting in the son of Pritha, not
thus should the champion and chief hope of a righteous cause abandon it in
the hour of crisis and peril or suffer the sudden amazement of his heart and
senses, the clouding of his reason and the downfall of his will to betray him
into the casting away of his divine weapons and the refusal of his God-given
work. This is not the way cherished and followed by the Aryan man; this
mood came not from heaven nor can it lead to heaven, and on earth it is the
forfeiting of the glory that waits upon strength and heroism and noble works.
Let him put from him this weak and self-indulgent pity, let him rise and smite
his enemies!
\par The answer of a hero to a hero, shall we say, but not that which we
should expect from a divine Teacher from whom we demand rather that he
shall encourage always gentleness and saintliness and self-abnegation and the
recoil from worldly aims and cessation from the ways of the world? The Gita
expressly says that Arjuna has thus lapsed into unheroic weakness, “his eyes
full and distressed with tears, his heart overcome by depression and
discouragement,” because he is invaded by pity, \s{k\,rpay\=avi\,s\,tam}. Is this not
then a divine weakness? Is not pity a divine emotion which should not thus be
discouraged with harsh rebuke? Or are we in face of a mere gospel of war
and heroic
Page 57

action, a Nietzschean creed of power and high-browed strength, of Hebraic
or old Teutonic hardness which holds pity to be a weakness and thinks like
the Norwegian hero who thanked God because He had given him a hard
heart? But the teaching of the Gita springs from an Indian creed and to the
Indian mind compassion has always figured as one of the largest elements of
the divine nature. The Teacher himself enumerating in a later chapter the
qualities of the godlike nature in man places among them compassion to
creatures, gentleness, freedom from wrath and from the desire to slay and do
hurt, no less than fearlessness and high spirit and energy. Harshness and
hardness and fierceness and a satisfaction in slaying enemies and amassing
wealth and unjust enjoyments are Asuric qualities; they come from the violent
Titanic nature which denies the Divine in the world and the Divine in man
and worships Desire only as its deity. It is not then from any such standpoint
that the weakness of Arjuna merits rebuke.
\par “Whence has come to thee this dejection, this stain and darkness of the
soul in the hour of difficulty and peril?” asks Krishna of Arjuna. The question
points to the real nature of Arjuna's deviation from his heroic qualities. There
is a divine compassion which descends to us from on high and for the man
whose nature does not possess it, is not cast in its mould, to pretend to be the
superior man, the master-man or the superman is a folly and an insolence, for
he alone is the superman who most manifests the highest nature of the
Godhead in humanity. This compassion observes with an eye of love and
wisdom and calm strength the battle and the struggle, the strength and
weakness of man, his virtues and sins, his joy and suffering, his knowledge
and his ignorance, his wisdom and his folly, his aspiration and his failure and it
enters into it all to help and to heal. In the saint and philanthropist it may cast
itself into the mould of a plenitude of love or charity; in the thinker and hero it
assumes the largeness and the force of a helpful wisdom and strength. It is
this compassion in the Aryan fighter, the soul of his chivalry, which will not
break the bruised reed, but helps and protects the weak and the oppressed
and the wounded and the fallen. But it
Page 58

is also the divine compassion that smites down the strong tyrant and the
confident oppressor, not in wrath and with hatred,—for these are not the high
divine qualities, the wrath of God against the sinner, God's hatred of the
wicked are the fables of half-enlightened creeds, as much a fable as the
eternal torture of the Hells they have invented,—but, as the old Indian
spirituality clearly saw, with as much love and compassion for the strong
Titan erring by his strength and slain for his sins as for the sufferer and the
oppressed who have to be saved from his violence and injustice.
\par But such is not the compassion which actuates Arjuna in the rejection of
his work and mission. That is not compassion but an impotence full of a weak
self-pity, a recoil from the mental suffering which his act must entail on
himself,—“I see not what shall thrust from me the sorrow that dries up the
senses,”—and of all things self-pity is among the most ignoble and un-Aryan
of moods. Its pity for others is also a form of self-indulgence; it is the
physical shrinking of the nerves from the act of slaughter, the egoistic
emotional shrinking of the heart from the destruction of the Dhritarashtrians
because they are “one's own people” and without them life will be empty.
This pity is a weakness of the mind and senses,—a weakness which may
well be beneficial to men of a lower grade of development, who have to be
weak because otherwise they will be hard and cruel; for they have to cure
the harsher by the gentler forms of sensational egoism, they have to call in
tamas, the debile principle, to help sattwa, the principle of light, in quelling the
strength and excess of their rajasic passions. But this way is not for the
developed Aryan man who has to grow not by weakness, but by an
ascension from strength to strength. Arjuna is the divine man, the
master-man in the making and as such he has been chosen by the gods. He
has a work given to him, he has God beside him in his chariot, he has the
heavenly bow Gandiva in his hand, he has the champions of unrighteousness,
the opponents of the divine leading of the world in his front. Not his is the
right to determine what he shall do or not do according to his emotions and
his passions, or to shrink from
Page 59

a necessary destruction by the claim of his egoistic heart and reason, or to
decline his work because it will bring sorrow and emptiness to his life or
because its earthly result has no value to him in the absence of the thousands
who must perish. All that is a weak falling from his higher nature. He has to
see only the work that must be done, \s{kartavya\.m karma}, to hear only the
divine command breathed through his warrior nature, to feel only for the
world and the destiny of mankind calling to him as its god-sent man to assist
its march and clear its path of the dark armies that beset it.
\par Arjuna in his reply to Krishna admits the rebuke even while he strives
against and refuses the command. He is aware of his weakness and yet
accepts subjection to it. It is poorness of spirit, he owns, that has smitten
away from him his true heroic nature; his whole consciousness is bewildered
in its view of right and wrong and he accepts the divine Friend as his teacher;
but the emotional and intellectual props on which he had supported his sense
of righteousness have been entirely cast down and he cannot accept a
command which seems to appeal only to his old standpoint and gives him no
new basis for action. He attempts still to justify his refusal of the work and
puts forward in its support the claim of his nervous and sensational being
which shrinks from the slaughter with its sequel of blood-stained enjoyments,
the claim of his heart which recoils from the sorrow and emptiness of life that
will follow his act, the claim of his customary moral notions which are
appalled by the necessity of slaying his gurus, Bhishma and Drona, the claim
of his reason which sees no good but only evil results of the terrible and
violent work assigned to him. He is resolved that on the old basis of thought
and motive he will not fight and he awaits in silence the answer to objections
that seem to him unanswerable. It is these claims of Arjuna's egoistic being
that Krishna sets out first to destroy in order to make place for the higher law
which shall transcend all egoistic motives of action.
\par The answer of the Teacher proceeds upon two different lines, first, a
brief reply founded upon the highest ideas of the general Aryan culture in
which Arjuna has been educated,
Page 60

secondly, another and larger founded on a more intimate knowledge, opening
into deeper truths of our being, which is the real starting-point of the teaching
of the Gita. This first answer relies on the philosophic and moral conceptions
of the Vedantic philosophy and the social idea of duty and honour which
formed the ethical basis of Aryan society. Arjuna has sought to justify his
refusal on ethical and rational grounds, but he has merely cloaked by words
of apparent rationality the revolt of his ignorant and unchastened emotions.
He has spoken of the physical life and the death of the body as if these were
the primary realities; but they have no such essential value to the sage and
the thinker. The sorrow for the bodily death of his friends and kindred is a
grief to which wisdom and the true knowledge of life lend no sanction. The
enlightened man does not mourn either for the living or the dead, for he
knows that suffering and death are merely incidents in the history of the soul.
The soul, not the body, is the reality. All these kings of men for whose
approaching death he mourns, have lived before, they will live again in the
human body; for as the soul passes physically through childhood and youth
and age, so it passes on to the changing of the body. The calm and wise
mind, the \s{dh\=ira}, the thinker who looks upon life steadily and does not
allow himself to be disturbed and blinded by his sensations and emotions, is
not deceived by material appearances; he does not allow the clamour of his
blood and his nerves and his heart to cloud his judgment or to contradict his
knowledge. He looks beyond the apparent facts of the life of the body and
senses to the real fact of his being and rises beyond the emotional and
physical desires of the ignorant nature to the true and only aim of the human
existence.
\par What is that real fact? that highest aim? This, that human life and death
repeated through the aeons in the great cycles of the world are only a long
progress by which the human being prepares and makes himself fit for
immortality. And how shall he prepare himself? who is the man that is fit?
The man who rises above the conception of himself as a life and a body, who
does not accept the material and sensational touches of the world at their
own value or at the value which the physical man attaches
Page 61

to them, who knows himself and all as souls, learns himself to live in his soul
and not in his body and deals with others too as souls and not as mere
physical beings. For by immortality is meant not the survival of death,—that is
already given to every creature born with a mind,—but the transcendence of
life and death. It means that ascension by which man ceases to live as a
mind-informed body and lives at last as a spirit and in the Spirit. Whoever is
subject to grief and sorrow, a slave to the sensations and emotions, occupied
by the touches of things transient cannot become fit for immortality. These
things must be borne until they are conquered, till they can give no pain to the
liberated man, till he is able to receive all the material happenings of the world
whether joyful or sorrowful with a wise and calm equality, even as the
tranquil eternal Spirit secret within us receives them. To be disturbed by
sorrow and horror as Arjuna has been disturbed, to be deflected by them
from the path that has to be travelled, to be overcome by self-pity and
intolerance of sorrow and recoil from the unavoidable and trivial
circumstance of the death of the body, this is un-Aryan ignorance. It is not
the way of the Aryan climbing in calm strength towards the immortal life.
\par There is no such thing as death, for it is the body that dies and the body
is not the man. That which really is, cannot go out of existence, though it may
change the forms through which it appears, just as that which is non-existent
cannot come into being. The soul is and cannot cease to be. This opposition
of is and is not, this balance of being and becoming which is the mind's view
of existence, finds its end in the realisation of the soul as the one imperishable
self by whom all this universe has been extended. Finite bodies have an end,
but that which possesses and uses the body, is infinite, illimitable, eternal,
indestructible. It casts away old and takes up new bodies as a man changes
worn-out raiment for new; and what is there in this to grieve at and recoil and
shrink? This is not born, nor does it die, nor is it a thing that comes into being
once and passing away will never come into being again. It is unborn, ancient,
sempiternal; it is not slain with the slaying of the body. Who can slay the
immortal spirit? Weapons cannot cleave it, nor the fire burn, nor do the
Page 62

waters drench it, nor the wind dry. Eternally stable, immobile, all-pervading, it
is for ever and for ever. Not manifested like the body, but greater than all
manifestation, not to be analysed by the thought, but greater than all mind, not
capable of change and modification like the life and its organs and their
objects, but beyond the changes of mind and life and body, it is yet the Reality
which all these strive to figure.
\par Even if the truth of our being were a thing less sublime, vast, intangible
by death and life, if the self were constantly subject to birth and death, still
the death of beings ought not to be a cause of sorrow. For that is an
inevitable circumstance of the soul's self-manifestation. Its birth is an
appearing out of some state in which it is not non-existent but unmanifest to
our mortal senses, its death is a return to that unmanifest world or condition
and out of it it will again appear in the physical manifestation. The to-do made
by the physical mind and senses about death and the horror of death whether
on the sick-bed or the battlefield, is the most ignorant of nervous clamours.
Our sorrow for the death of men is an ignorant grieving for those for whom
there is no cause to grieve, since they have neither gone out of existence nor
suffered any painful or terrible change of condition, but are beyond death no
less in being and no more unhappy in circumstance than in life. But in reality
the higher truth is the real truth. All are that Self, that One, that Divine whom
we look on and speak and hear of as the wonderful beyond our
comprehension, for after all our seeking and declaring of knowledge and
learning from those who have knowledge no human mind has ever known
this Absolute. It is this which is here veiled by the world, the master of the
body; all life is only its shadow; the coming of the soul into physical
manifestation and our passing out of it by death is only one of its minor
movements. When we have known ourselves as this, then to speak of
ourselves as slayer or slain is an absurdity. One thing only is the truth in
which we have to live, the Eternal manifesting itself as the soul of man in the
great cycle of its pilgrimage with birth and death for milestones, with worlds
beyond as resting-places, with all the circumstances of life happy or unhappy
as the means of
Page 63

our progress and battle and victory and with immortality as the home to
which the soul travels.
\par Therefore, says the Teacher, put away this vain sorrow and shrinking,
fight, O son of Bharata. But wherefore such a conclusion? This high and
great knowledge, this strenuous self-discipline of the mind and soul by which
it is to rise beyond the clamour of the emotions and the cheat of the senses to
true self-knowledge, may well free us from grief and delusion; it may well
cure us of the fear of death and the sorrow for the dead; it may well show us
that those whom we speak of as dead are not dead at all nor to be sorrowed
for, since they have only gone beyond; it may well teach us to look
undisturbed upon the most terrible assaults of life and upon the death of the
body as a trifle; it may exalt us to the conception of all life's circumstances as
a manifestation of the One and as a means for our souls to raise themselves
above appearances by an upward evolution until we know ourselves as the
immortal Spirit. But how does it justify the action demanded of Arjuna and
the slaughter of Kurukshetra? The answer is that this is the action required of
Arjuna in the path he has to travel; it has come inevitably in the performance
of the function demanded of him by his \s{svadharma}, his social duty, the
law of his life and the law of his being. This world, this manifestation of the
Self in the material universe is not only a cycle of inner development, but a
field in which the external circumstances of life have to be accepted as an
environment and an occasion for that development. It is a world of mutual
help and struggle; not a serene and peaceful gliding through easy joys is the
progress it allows us, but every step has to be gained by heroic effort and
through a clash of opposing forces. Those who take up the inner and the
outer struggle even to the most physical clash of all, that of war, are the
Kshatriyas, the mighty men; war, force, nobility, courage are their nature;
protection of the right and an unflinching acceptance of the gage of battle is
their virtue and their duty. For there is continually a struggle between right
and wrong, justice and injustice, the force that protects and the force that
violates and oppresses, and when this has once been brought to the issue of
physical strife, the champion and
Page 64

standard-bearer of the Right must not shake and tremble at the violent and
terrible nature of the work he has to do; he must not abandon his followers or
fellow-fighters, betray his cause and leave the standard of Right and Justice
to trail in the dust and be trampled into mire by the blood-stained feet of the
oppressor, because of a weak pity for the violent and cruel and a physical
horror of the vastness of the destruction decreed. His virtue and his duty lie
in battle and not in abstention from battle; it is not slaughter, but non-slaying
which would here be the sin.
\par The Teacher then turns aside for a moment to give another answer to
the cry of Arjuna over the sorrow of the death of kindred which will empty
his life of the causes and objects of living. What is the true object of the
Kshatriya's life and his true happiness? Not self-pleasing and domestic
happiness and a life of comfort and peaceful joy with friends and relatives,
but to battle for the right is his true object of life and to find a cause for which
he can lay down his life or by victory win the crown and glory of the hero's
existence is his greatest happiness. “There is no greater good for the
Kshatriya than righteous battle, and when such a battle comes to them of
itself like the open gate of heaven, happy are the Kshatriyas then. If thou
doest not this battle for the right, then hast thou abandoned thy duty and
virtue and thy glory, and sin shall be thy portion.” He will by such a refusal
incur disgrace and the reproach of fear and weakness and the loss of his
Kshatriya honour. For what is worst grief for a Kshatriya? It is the loss of his
honour, his fame, his noble station among the mighty men, the men of
courage and power; that to him is much worse than death. Battle, courage,
power, rule, the honour of the brave, the heaven of those who fall nobly, this
is the warrior's ideal. To lower that ideal, to allow a smirch to fall on that
honour, to give the example of a hero among heroes whose action lays itself
open to the reproach of cowardice and weakness and thus to lower the moral
standard of mankind, is to be false to himself and to the demand of the world
on its leaders and kings. “Slain thou shalt win Heaven, victorious thou shalt
enjoy the earth; therefore arise, O son of Kunti, resolved upon battle.”
Page 65

\par This heroic appeal may seem to be on a lower level than the stoical
spirituality which precedes and the deeper spirituality which follows; for in
the next verse the Teacher bids him to make grief and happiness, loss and
gain, victory and defeat equal to his soul and then turn to the battle,—the real
teaching of the Gita. But Indian ethics has always seen the practical
necessity of graded ideals for the developing moral and spiritual life of man.
The Kshatriya ideal, the ideal of the four orders is here placed in its social
aspect, not as afterwards in its spiritual meaning. This, says Krishna in effect,
is my answer to you if you insist on joy and sorrow and the result of your
actions as your motive of action. I have shown you in what direction the
higher knowledge of self and the world points you; I have now shown you in
what direction your social duty and the ethical standard of your order point
you, \s{svadharmam api c\=avek\,sya}. Whichever you consider, the result is the
same. But if you are not satisfied with your social duty and the virtue of your
order, if you think that leads you to sorrow and sin, then I bid you rise to a
higher and not sink to a lower ideal. Put away all egoism from you, disregard
joy and sorrow, disregard gain and loss and all worldly results; look only at
the cause you must serve and the work that you must achieve by divine
command; “so thou shalt not incur sin.” Thus Arjuna's plea of sorrow, his
plea of the recoil from slaughter, his plea of the sense of sin, his plea of the
unhappy results of his action, are answered according to the highest
knowledge and ethical ideals to which his race and age had attained.
\par It is the creed of the Aryan fighter. “Know God,” it says, “know thyself,
help man; protect the Right, do without fear or weakness or faltering thy
work of battle in the world. Thou art the eternal and imperishable Spirit, thy
soul is here on its upward path to immortality; life and death are nothing,
sorrow and wounds and suffering are nothing, for these things have to be
conquered and overcome. Look not at thy own pleasure and gain and profit,
but above and around, above at the shining summits to which thou climbest,
around at this world of battle and trial in which good and evil, progress and
retrogression are locked in stern conflict. Men call to thee, their strong man,
their
Page 66

hero for help; help then, fight. Destroy when by destruction the world must
advance, but hate not that which thou destroyest, neither grieve for all those
who perish. Know everywhere the one self, know all to be immortal souls
and the body to be but dust. Do thy work with a calm, strong and equal spirit;
fight and fall nobly or conquer mightily. For this is the work that God and thy
nature have given to thee to accomplish.”
Page 67

\par
\HN VIII
\par
\ht Sankhya and Yoga
\par\drop In the moment of his turning from this first and summary answer to
Arjuna's difficulties and in the very first words which strike the keynote of a
spiritual solution, the Teacher makes at once a distinction which is of the
utmost importance for the understanding of the Gita,—the distinction of
Sankhya and Yoga. “Such is the intelligence (the intelligent knowledge of
things and will) declared to thee in the Sankhya, hear now this in the Yoga,
for if thou art in Yoga by this intelligence, O son of Pritha, thou shalt cast
away the bondage of works.” That is the literal translation of the words in
which the Gita announces the distinction it intends to make.
\par The Gita is in its foundation a Vedantic work; it is one of the three
recognised authorities for the Vedantic teaching and, although not described
as a revealed Scripture, although, that is to say, it is largely intellectual,
ratiocinative, philosophical in its method, founded indeed on the Truth, but not
the directly inspired Word which is the revelation of the Truth through the
higher faculties of the seer, it is yet so highly esteemed as to be ranked
almost as a thirteenth Upanishad. But still its Vedantic ideas are throughout
and thoroughly coloured by the ideas of the Sankhya and the Yoga way of
thinking and it derives from this colouring the peculiar synthetic character of
its philosophy. It is in fact primarily a practical system of Yoga that it teaches
and it brings in metaphysical ideas only as explanatory of its practical system;
nor does it merely declare Vedantic knowledge, but it founds knowledge and
devotion upon works, even as it uplifts works to knowledge, their culmination,
and informs them with devotion as their very heart and kernel of their spirit.
Again its Yoga is founded upon the analytical philosophy of the Sankhyas,
takes that as a starting-point and always keeps it as a large element of its
method and doctrine; but still it proceeds far
Page 68

beyond it, negatives even some of its characteristic tendencies and finds a
means of reconciling the lower analytical knowledge of Sankhya with the
higher synthetic and Vedantic truth.
\par What, then, are the Sankhya and Yoga of which the Gita speaks? They
are certainly not the systems which have come down to us under these
names as enunciated respectively in the Sankhya Karika of Ishwara Krishna
and the Yoga aphorisms of Patanjali. This Sankhya is not the system of the
Karikas,—at least as that is generally understood; for the Gita nowhere for a
moment admits the multiplicity of Purushas as a primal truth of being and it
affirms emphatically what the traditional Sankhya strenuously denies, the One
as Self and Purusha, that One again as the Lord, Ishwara or Purushottama,
and Ishwara as the cause of the universe. The traditional Sankhya is, to use
our modern distinctions, atheistic; the Sankhya of the Gita admits and subtly
reconciles the theistic, pantheistic and monistic views of the universe.
\par Nor is this Yoga the Yoga system of Patanjali; for that is a purely
subjective method of Rajayoga, an internal discipline, limited, rigidly cut out,
severely and scientifically graded, by which the mind is progressively stilled
and taken up into Samadhi so that we may gain the temporal and eternal
results of this self-exceeding, the temporal in a great expansion of the soul's
knowledge and powers, the eternal in the divine union. But the Yoga of the
Gita is a large, flexible and many-sided system with various elements, which
are all successfully harmonised by a sort of natural and living assimilation,
and of these elements Rajayoga is only one and not the most important and
vital. This Yoga does not adopt any strict and scientific gradation but is a
process of natural soul-development; it seeks by the adoption of a few
principles of subjective poise and action to bring about a renovation of the
soul and a sort of change, ascension or new birth out of the lower nature into
the divine. Accordingly, its idea of Samadhi is quite different from the
ordinary notion of the Yogic trance; and while Patanjali gives to works only
an initial importance for moral purification and religious concentration, the
Gita goes so far as to make works the distinctive
Page 69

characteristic of Yoga. Action to Patanjali is only a preliminary, in the Gita it
is a permanent foundation; in the Rajayoga it has practically to be put aside
when its result has been attained or at any rate ceases very soon to be a
means for the Yoga, for the Gita it is a means of the highest ascent and
continues even after the complete liberation of the soul.
\par This much has to be said in order to avoid any confusion of thought that
might be created by the use of familiar words in a connotation wider than the
technical sense now familiar to us. Still, all that is essential in the Sankhya
and Yoga systems, all in them that is large, catholic and universally true, is
admitted by the Gita, even though it does not limit itself by them like the
opposing schools. Its Sankhya is the catholic and Vedantic Sankhya such as
we find it in its first principles and elements in the great Vedantic synthesis of
the Upanishads and in the later developments of the Puranas. Its idea of
Yoga is that large idea of a principally subjective practice and inner change,
necessary for the finding of the Self or the union with God, of which the
Rajayoga is only one special application. The Gita insists that Sankhya and
Yoga are not two different, incompatible and discordant systems, but one in
their principle and aim; they differ only in their method and starting-point. The
Sankhya also is a Yoga, but it proceeds by knowledge; it starts, that is to say,
by intellectual discrimination and analysis of the principles of our being and
attains its aim through the vision and possession of the Truth. Yoga, on the
other hand, proceeds by works; it is in its first principle Karmayoga; but it is
evident from the whole teaching of the Gita and its later definitions that the
word \s{karma} is used in a very wide sense and that by Yoga is meant the
selfless devotion of all the inner as well as the outer activities as a sacrifice to
the Lord of all works, offered to the Eternal as Master of all the soul's
energies and austerities. Yoga is the practice of the Truth of which
knowledge gives the vision, and its practice has for its motor-power a spirit of
illumined devotion, of calm or fervent consecration to that which knowledge
sees to be the Highest.
\par But what are the truths of Sankhya? The philosophy drew
Page 70

its name from its analytical process. Sankhya is the analysis, the enumeration,
the separative and discriminative setting forth of the principles of our being of
which the ordinary mind sees only the combinations and results of
combination. It did not seek at all to synthetise. Its original standpoint is in
fact dualistic, not with the very relative dualism of the Vedantic schools
which call themselves by that name, Dwaita, but in a very absolute and
trenchant fashion. For it explains existence not by one, but by two original
principles whose inter-relation is the cause of the universe,—Purusha, the
inactive, Prakriti, the active. Purusha is the Soul, not in the ordinary or
popular sense of the word, but of pure conscious Being immobile, immutable
and self-luminous. Prakriti is Energy and its process. Purusha does nothing,
but it reflects the action of Energy and its processes; Prakriti is mechanical,
but by being reflected in Purusha it assumes the appearance of
consciousness in its activities, and thus there are created those phenomena of
creation, conservation, dissolution, birth and life and death, consciousness and
unconsciousness, sense-knowledge and intellectual knowledge and ignorance,
action and inaction, happiness and suffering which the Purusha under the
influence of Prakriti attributes to itself although they belong not at all to itself
but to the action or movement of Prakriti alone.
\par For Prakriti is constituted of three \s{gu\,nas} or essential modes of
energy; sattwa, the seed of intelligence, conserves the workings of energy;
rajas, the seed of force and action, creates the workings of energy; tamas,
the seed of inertia and non-intelligence, the denial of sattwa and rajas,
dissolves what they create and conserve. When these three powers of the
energy of Prakriti are in a state of equilibrium, all is in rest, there is no
movement, action or creation and there is therefore nothing to be reflected in
the immutable luminous being of the conscious Soul. But when the equilibrium
is disturbed, then the three gunas fall into a state of inequality in which they
strive with and act upon each other and the whole inextricable business of
ceaseless creation, conservation and dissolution begins, unrolling the
phenomena of the cosmos. This continues so long as
Page 71

the Purusha consents to reflect the disturbance which obscures his eternal
nature and attributes to it the nature of Prakriti; but when he withdraws his
consent, the gunas fall into equilibrium and the soul returns to its eternal,
unchanging immobility; it is delivered from phenomena. This reflection and
this giving or withdrawal of consent seem to be the only powers of Purusha;
he is the witness of Nature by virtue of reflection and the giver of the
sanction, \s{s\=ak\,s\=i} and \s{anumant\=a} of the Gita, but not actively the
Ishwara. Even his giving of consent is passive and his withdrawing of
consent is only another passivity. All action subjective or objective is foreign
to the Soul; it has neither an active will nor an active intelligence. It cannot
therefore be the sole cause of the cosmos and the affirmation of a second
cause becomes necessary. Not Soul alone by its nature of conscious
knowledge, will and delight is the cause of the universe, but Soul and Nature
are the dual cause, a passive Consciousness and an active Energy. So the
Sankhya explains the existence of the cosmos.
\par But whence then come this conscious intelligence and conscious will
which we perceive to be so large a part of our being and which we
commonly and instinctively refer not to the Prakriti, but to the Purusha?
According to the Sankhya this intelligence and will are entirely a part of the
mechanical energy of Nature and are not properties of the soul; they are the
principle of Buddhi, one of the twenty-four \s{tattvas}, the twenty-four
cosmic principles. Prakriti in the evolution of the world bases herself with her
three gunas in her as the original substance of things, unmanifest, inconscient,
out of which are evolved successively five elemental conditions of energy or
matter,—for Matter and Force are the same in the Sankhya philosophy.
These are called by the names of the five concrete elements of ancient
thought, ether, air, fire, water and earth; but it must be remembered that they
are not elements in the modern scientific sense but subtle conditions of
material energy and nowhere to be found in their purity in the gross material
world. All objects are created by the combination of these five subtle
conditions or elements. Again, each of these five is the base of one of five
subtle properties of
Page 72

energy or matter, sound, touch, form, taste and smell, which constitute the
way in which the mind-sense perceives objects. Thus by these five elements
of Matter put forth from primary energy and these five sense relations
through which Matter is known is evolved what we would call in modern
language the objective aspect of cosmic existence.
\par Thirteen other principles constitute the subjective aspect of the cosmic
Energy,—Buddhi or Mahat, Ahankara, Manas and its ten sense-functions,
five of knowledge, five of action. Manas, mind, is the original sense which
perceives all objects and reacts upon them; for it has at once an inferent and
an efferent activity, receives by perception what the Gita calls the outward
touches of things, \s{b\=ahya spar\'sa}, and so forms its idea of the world and
exercises its reactions of active vitality. But it specialises its most ordinary
functions of reception by aid of the five perceptive senses of hearing, touch,
sight, taste and smell, which make the five properties of things their
respective objects, and specialises certain necessary vital functions of
reaction by aid of the five active senses which operate for speech,
locomotion, the seizing of things, ejection and generation. Buddhi, the
discriminating principle, is at once intelligence and will; it is that power in
Nature which discriminates and coordinates. Ahankara, the ego-sense, is the
subjective principle in Buddhi by which the Purusha is induced to identify
himself with Prakriti and her activities. But these subjective principles are
themselves as mechanical, as much a part of the inconscient energy as those
which constitute her objective operations. If we find it difficult to realise how
intelligence and will can be properties of the mechanical Inconscient and
themselves mechanical (\s{ja\,da}), we have only to remember that modern
Science itself has been driven to the same conclusion. Even in the
mechanical action of the atom there is a power which can only be called an
inconscient will and in all the works of Nature that pervading will does
inconsciently the works of intelligence. What we call mental intelligence is
precisely the same thing in its essence as that which discriminates and
coordinates subconsciously in all the activities of the material universe, and
conscious Mind itself, Science has tried
Page 73

to demonstrate, is only a result and transcript of the mechanical action of the
inconscient. But Sankhya explains what modern Science leaves in obscurity,
the process by which the mechanical and inconscient takes on the
appearance of consciousness. It is because of the reflection of Prakriti in
Purusha; the light of consciousness of the Soul is attributed to the workings of
the mechanical energy and it is thus that the Purusha, observing Nature as
the witness and forgetting himself, is deluded with the idea generated in her
that it is he who thinks, feels, wills, acts, while all the time the operation of
thinking, feeling, willing, acting is conducted really by her and her three
modes and not by himself at all. To get rid of this delusion is the first step
towards the liberation of the soul from Nature and her works.
\par There are certainly plenty of things in our existence which the Sankhya
does not explain at all or does not explain satisfactorily, but if all we need is a
rational explanation of the cosmic processes in their principles as a basis for
the great object common to the ancient philosophies, the liberation of the soul
from the obsession of cosmic Nature, then the Sankhya explanation of the
world and the Sankhya way of liberation seem as good and as effective as
any other. What we do not seize at first is why it should bring in an element
of pluralism into its dualism by affirming one Prakriti, but many Purushas. It
would seem that the existence of one Purusha and one Prakriti should be
sufficient to account for the creation and procession of the universe. But the
Sankhya was bound to evolve pluralism by its rigidly analytical observation of
the principles of things. First, actually, we find that there are many conscious
beings in the world and each regards the same world in his own way and has
his independent experience of its subjective and objective things, his separate
dealings with the same perceptive and reactive processes. If there were only
one Purusha, there would not be this central independence and
separativeness, but all would see the world in an identical fashion and with a
common subjectivity and objectivity. Because Prakriti is one, all witness the
same world; because her principles are everywhere the same, the general
principles which constitute internal and external experience are the
Page 74

same for all; but the infinite difference of view and outlook and attitude,
action and experience and escape from experience,—a difference not of the
natural operations which are the same but of the witnessing
consciousness,—are utterly inexplicable except on the supposition that there
is a multiplicity of witnesses, many Purushas. The separative ego-sense, we
may say, is a sufficient explanation? But the ego-sense is a common principle
of Nature and need not vary; for by itself it simply induces the Purusha to
identify himself with Prakriti, and if there is only one Purusha, all beings
would be one, joined and alike in their egoistic consciousness; however
different in detail might be the mere forms and combinations of their natural
parts, there would be no difference of soul-outlook and soul-experience. The
variations of Nature ought not to make all this central difference, this
multiplicity of outlook and from beginning to end this separateness of
experience in one Witness, one Purusha. Therefore the pluralism of souls is a
logical necessity to a pure Sankhya system divorced from the Vedantic
elements of the ancient knowledge which first gave it birth. The cosmos and
its process can be explained by the commerce of one Prakriti with one
Purusha, but not the multiplicity of conscious beings in the cosmos.
\par There is another difficulty quite as formidable. Liberation is the object
set before itself by this philosophy as by others. This liberation is effected, we
have said, by the Purusha's withdrawal of his consent from the activities of
Prakriti which she conducts only for his pleasure; but, in sum, this is only a
way of speaking. The Purusha is passive and the act of giving or withdrawing
consent cannot really belong to it, but must be a movement in Prakriti itself. If
we consider, we shall see that it is, so far as it is an operation, a movement of
reversal or recoil in the principle of Buddhi, the discriminative will. Buddhi
has been lending itself to the perceptions of the mind-sense; it has been busy
discriminating and coordinating the operations of the cosmic energy and by
the aid of the ego-sense identifying the Witness with her works of thought,
sense and action. It arrives by the process of discriminating things at the acid
and dissolvent realisation that this identity is a delusion; it discriminates finally
the Purusha
Page 75

from Prakriti and perceives that all is mere disturbance of the equilibrium of
the gunas; the Buddhi, at once intelligence and will, recoils from the falsehood
which it has been supporting and the Purusha, ceasing to be bound, no longer
associates himself with the interest of the mind in the cosmic play. The
ultimate result will be that Prakriti will lose her power to reflect herself in the
Purusha; for the effect of the ego-sense is destroyed and the intelligent will
becoming indifferent ceases to be the means of her sanction: necessarily then
her gunas must fall into a state of equilibrium, the cosmic play must cease,
the Purusha return to his immobile repose. But if there were only the one
Purusha and this recoil of the discriminating principle from its delusions took
place, all cosmos would cease. As it is, we see that nothing of the kind
happens. A few beings among innumerable millions attain to liberation or
move towards it; the rest are in no way affected, nor is cosmic Nature in her
play with them one whit inconvenienced by this summary rejection which
should be the end of all her processes. Only by the theory of many
independent Purushas can this fact be explained. The only at all logical
explanation from the point of view of Vedantic monism is that of the
Mayavada; but there the whole thing becomes a dream, both bondage and
liberation are circumstances of the unreality, the empirical blunderings of
Maya; in reality there is none freed, none bound. The more realistic Sankhya
view of things does not admit this phantasmagoric idea of existence and
therefore cannot adopt this solution. Here too we see that the multiplicity of
souls is an inevitable conclusion from the data of the Sankhya analysis of
existence.
\par The Gita starts from this analysis and seems at first, even in its setting
forth of Yoga, to accept it almost wholly. It accepts Prakriti and her three
gunas and twenty-four principles; accepts the attribution of all action to the
Prakriti and the passivity of the Purusha; accepts the multiplicity of conscious
beings in the cosmos; accepts the dissolution of the identifying ego-sense, the
discriminating action of the intelligent will and the transcendence of the action
of the three modes of energy as the means of liberation. The Yoga which
Arjuna is asked to practise from
Page 76

the outset is Yoga by the Buddhi, the intelligent will. But there is one
deviation of capital importance,—the Purusha is regarded as one, not many;
for the free, immaterial, immobile, eternal, immutable Self of the Gita, but for
one detail, is a Vedantic description of the eternal, passive, immobile,
immutable Purusha of the Sankhyas. But the capital difference is that there is
One and not many. This brings in the whole difficulty which the Sankhya
multiplicity avoids and necessitates a quite different solution. This the Gita
provides by bringing into its Vedantic Sankhya the ideas and principles of
Vedantic Yoga.
\par The first important new element we find is in the conception of Purusha
itself. Prakriti conducts her activities for the pleasure of Purusha; but how is
that pleasure determined? In the strict Sankhya analysis it can only be by a
passive consent of the silent Witness. Passively the Witness consents to the
action of the intelligent will and the ego-sense, passively he consents to the
recoil of that will from the ego-sense. He is Witness, source of the consent,
by reflection upholder of the work of Nature, \s{s\=ak\,s\=i anumant\=a bhart\=a}, but
nothing more. But the Purusha of the Gita is also the Lord of Nature; he is
Ishwara. If the operation of the intelligent will belongs to Nature, the
origination and power of the will proceed from the conscious Soul; he is the
Lord of Nature. If the act of intelligence of the Will is the act of Prakriti, the
source and light of the intelligence are actively contributed by the Purusha; he
is not only the Witness, but the Lord and Knower, master of knowledge and
will, \s{j\~n\=at\=a \=i\'svara\,h}. He is the supreme cause of the action of Prakriti, the
supreme cause of its withdrawal from action. In the Sankhya analysis
Purusha and Prakriti in their dualism are the cause of the cosmos; in this
synthetic Sankhya Purusha by {\it his} Prakriti is the cause of the cosmos.
We see at once how far we have travelled from the rigid purism of the
traditional analysis.
\par But what of the one self immutable, immobile, eternally free, with which
the Gita began? That is free from all change or involution in change,
\s{avik\=arya}, unborn, unmanifested, the Brahman, yet it is that “by which all
this is extended.” Therefore it would seem that the principle of the Ishwara is
in its being;
Page 77

if it is immobile, it is yet the cause and lord of all action and mobility. But
how? And what of the multiplicity of conscious beings in the cosmos? They
do not seem to be the Lord, but rather very much not the Lord, \s{an\=i\'sa}, for
they are subject to the action of the three gunas and the delusion of the
ego-sense, and if, as the Gita seems to say, they are all the one self, how did
this involution, subjection and delusion come about or how is it explicable
except by the pure passivity of the Purusha? And whence the multiplicity? or
how is it that the one self in one body and mind attains to liberation while in
others it remains under the delusion of bondage? These are difficulties which
cannot be passed by without a solution.
\par The Gita answers them in its later chapters by an analysis of Purusha
and Prakriti which brings in new elements very proper to a Vedantic Yoga,
but alien to the traditional Sankhya. It speaks of three Purushas or rather a
triple status of the Purusha. The Upanishads in dealing with the truths of
Sankhya seem sometimes to speak only of two Purushas. There is one
unborn of three colours, says a text, the eternal feminine principle of Prakriti
with its three gunas, ever creating; there are two unborn, two Purushas, of
whom one cleaves to and enjoys her, the other abandons her because he has
enjoyed all her enjoyments. In another verse they are described as two birds
on one tree, eternally yoked companions, one of whom eats the fruits of the
tree,—the Purusha in Nature enjoying her cosmos,—the other eats not, but
watches his fellow,—the silent Witness, withdrawn from the enjoyment;
when the first sees the second and knows that all is his greatness, then he is
delivered from sorrow. The point of view in the two verses is different, but
they have a common implication. One of the birds is the eternally silent,
unbound Self or Purusha by whom all this is extended and he regards the
cosmos he has extended, but is aloof from it; the other is the Purusha
involved in Prakriti. The first verse indicates that the two are the same,
represent different states, bound and liberated, of the same conscious
being,—for the second Unborn has descended into the enjoyment of Nature
and withdrawn from her; the other verse brings out what we would
Page 78

not gather from the former, that in its higher status of unity the self is for ever
free, inactive, unattached, though it descends in its lower being into the
multiplicity of the creatures of Prakriti and withdraws from it by reversion in
any individual creature to the higher status. This theory of the double status
of the one conscious soul opens a door; but the process of the multiplicity of
the One is still obscure.
\par To these two the Gita, developing the thought of other passages in the
Upanishads,
\note{\s{Puru\,sa\,h}\sdots . . . \s{ak\,sar\=at parata\,h para\,h},—although the
Akshara is supreme, there is a supreme Purusha higher than it, says the
Upanishad.} adds yet another, the supreme, the Purushottama, the highest
Purusha, whose greatness all this creation is. Thus there are three, the
Kshara, the Akshara, the Uttama. Kshara, the mobile, the mutable is Nature,
\s{svabh\=ava}, it is the various becoming of the soul; the Purusha here is the
multiplicity of the divine Being; it is the Purusha multiple not apart from, but in
Prakriti. Akshara, the immobile, the immutable, is the silent and inactive self,
it is the unity of the divine Being, Witness of Nature, but not involved in its
movement; it is the inactive Purusha free from Prakriti and her works. The
Uttama is the Lord, the supreme Brahman, the supreme Self, who possesses
both the immutable unity and the mobile multiplicity. It is by a large mobility
and action of His nature, His energy, His will and power, that He manifests
Himself in the world and by a greater stillness and immobility of His being
that He is aloof from it; yet is He as Purushottama above both the aloofness
from Nature and the attachment to Nature. This idea of the Purushottama,
though continually implied in the Upanishads, is disengaged and definitely
brought out by the Gita and has exercised a powerful influence on the later
developments of the Indian religious consciousness. It is the foundation of the
highest Bhaktiyoga which claims to exceed the rigid definitions of monistic
philosophy; it is at the back of the philosophy of the devotional Puranas.
\par The Gita is not content, either, to abide within the Sankhya analysis of
Prakriti; for that makes room only for the ego-sense and not for the multiple
Purusha, which is there not a part of
Page 79

Prakriti, but separate from her. The Gita affirms on the contrary that the
Lord by His nature becomes the Jiva. How is that possible, since there are
only the twenty-four principles of the cosmic Energy and no others? Yes,
says the divine Teacher in effect, that is a perfectly valid account for the
apparent operations of the cosmic Prakriti with its three gunas, and the
relation attributed to Purusha and Prakriti there is also quite valid and of great
use for the practical purposes of the involution and the withdrawal. But this is
only the lower Prakriti of the three modes, the inconscient, the apparent;
there is a higher, a supreme, a conscient and divine Nature, and it is that
which has become the individual soul, the Jiva. In the lower nature each
being appears as the ego, in the higher he is the individual Purusha. In other
words multiplicity is part of the spiritual nature of the One. This individual
soul is myself, in the creation it is a partial manifestation of me, \s{mamaiva
a\.m\'sa\,h}, and it possesses all my powers; it is witness, giver of the sanction,
upholder, knower, lord. It descends into the lower nature and thinks itself
bound by action, so to enjoy the lower being: it can draw back and know itself
as the passive Purusha free from all action. It can rise above the three gunas
and, liberated from the bondage of action, yet possess action, even as I do
myself, and by adoration of the Purushottama and union with him it can enjoy
wholly its divine Nature.
\par Such is the analysis, not confining itself to the apparent cosmic process
but penetrating into the occult secrets of superconscious Nature, \s{uttama\.m
rahasyam}, by which the Gita founds its synthesis of Vedanta, Sankhya and
Yoga, its synthesis of knowledge, works and devotion. By the pure Sankhya
alone the combining of works and liberation is contradictory and impossible.
By pure Monism alone the permanent continuation of works as a part of
Yoga and the indulgence of devotion after perfect knowledge and liberation
and union are attained, become impossible or at least irrational and otiose.
The Sankhya knowledge of the Gita dissipates and the Yoga system of the
Gita triumphs over all these obstacles.
Page 80

\par
\HN IX
\par
\ht Sankhya, Yoga and Vedanta
\par\drop The whole object of the first six chapters of the Gita is to synthetise
in a large frame of Vedantic truth the two methods, ordinarily supposed to be
diverse and even opposite, of the Sankhyas and the Yogins. The Sankhya is
taken as the starting-point and the basis; but it is from the beginning and with
a progressively increasing emphasis permeated with the ideas and methods of
Yoga and remoulded in its spirit. The practical difference, as it seems to have
presented itself to the religious minds of that day, lay first in this that Sankhya
proceeded by knowledge and through the Yoga of the intelligence, while
Yoga proceeded by works and the transformation of the active
consciousness and, secondly,—a corollary of this first distinction,—that
Sankhya led to entire passivity and the renunciation of works, \s{sanny\=asa},
while Yoga held to be quite sufficient the inner renunciation of desire, the
purification of the subjective principle which leads to action and the turning of
works Godwards, towards the divine existence and towards liberation. Yet
both had the same aim, the transcendence of birth and of this terrestrial
existence and the union of the human soul with the Highest. This at least is
the difference as it is presented to us by the Gita.
\par The difficulty which Arjuna feels in understanding any possible synthesis
of these oppositions is an indication of the hard line that was driven in
between these two systems in the normal ideas of the time. The Teacher sets
out by reconciling works and the Yoga of the intelligence: the latter, he says,
is far superior to mere works; it is by the Yoga of the Buddhi, by knowledge
raising man out of the ordinary human mind and its desires into the purity and
equality of the Brahmic condition free from all desire that works can be made
acceptable. Yet are works a means of salvation, but works thus purified by
knowledge.
Page 81

Filled with the notions of the then prevailing culture, misled by the emphasis
which the Teacher lays upon the ideas proper to Vedantic Sankhya, conquest
of the senses, withdrawal from mind into the Self, ascent into the Brahmic
condition, extinction of our lower personality in the Nirvana of
impersonality,—for the ideas proper to Yoga are as yet subordinated and
largely held back,—Arjuna is perplexed and asks, “If thou holdest the
intelligence to be greater than works, why then dost thou appoint me to a
terrible work? Thou seemest to bewilder my intelligence with a confused and
mingled speech; tell me then decisively that one thing by which I may attain
to my soul's weal.”
\par In answer Krishna affirms that the Sankhya goes by knowledge and
renunciation, the Yoga by works; but the real renunciation is impossible
without Yoga, without works done as a sacrifice, done with equality and
without desire of the fruit, with the perception that it is Nature which does the
actions and not the soul; but immediately afterwards he declares that the
sacrifice of knowledge is the highest, all work finds its consummation in
knowledge, by the fire of knowledge all works are burnt up; therefore by
Yoga works are renounced and their bondage overcome for the man who is
in possession of his Self. Again Arjuna is perplexed; here are desireless
works, the principle of Yoga, and renunciation of works, the principle of
Sankhya, put together side by side as if part of one method, yet there is no
evident reconciliation between them. For the kind of reconciliation which the
Teacher has already given,—in outward inaction to see action still persisting
and in apparent action to see a real inaction since the soul has renounced its
illusion of the worker and given up works into the hands of the Master of
sacrifice,—is for the practical mind of Arjuna too slight, too subtle and
expressed almost in riddling words; he has not caught their sense or at least
not penetrated into their spirit and reality. Therefore he asks again, “Thou
declarest to me the renunciation of works, O Krishna, and again thou
declarest to me Yoga; which one of these is the better way, that tell me with
a clear decisiveness.”
\par The answer is important, for it puts the whole distinction
Page 82

very clearly and indicates though it does not develop entirely the line of
reconciliation. “Renunciation and Yoga of works both bring about the soul's
salvation, but of the two the Yoga of works is distinguished above the
renunciation of works. He should be known as always a Sannyasin (even
when he is doing action) who neither dislikes nor desires; for free from the
dualities he is released easily and happily from the bondage. Children speak
of Sankhya and Yoga apart from each other, not the wise; if a man applies
himself integrally to one, he gets the fruit of both,” because in their integrality
each contains the other. “The status which is attained by the Sankhya, to that
the men of the Yoga also arrive; who sees Sankhya and Yoga as one, he
sees. But renunciation is difficult to attain without Yoga; the sage who has
Yoga attains soon to the Brahman; his self becomes the self of all existences
(of all things that have become), and even though he does works, he is not
involved in them.” He knows that the actions are not his, but Nature's and by
that very knowledge he is free; he has renounced works, does no actions,
though actions are done through him; he becomes the Self, the Brahman,
\s{brahmabh\=uta}, he sees all existences as becomings (\s{bh\=ut\=ani}) of that
self-existent Being, his own only one of them, all their actions as only the
development of cosmic Nature working through their individual nature and his
own actions also as a part of the same cosmic activity. This is not the whole
teaching of the Gita; for as yet there is only the idea of the immutable self or
Purusha, the Akshara Brahman, and of Nature, Prakriti, as that which is
responsible for the cosmos and not yet the idea, clearly expressed, of the
Ishwara, the Purushottama; as yet only the synthesis of works and
knowledge and not yet, in spite of certain hints, the introduction of the
supreme element of devotion which becomes so important afterwards; as yet
only the one inactive Purusha and the lower Prakriti and not yet the
distinction of the triple Purusha and the double Prakriti. It is true the Ishwara
is spoken of, but his relation to the self and nature is not yet made definite.
The first six chapters only carry the synthesis so far as it can be carried
without the clear expression and decisive entrance of these all-important
truths
Page 83

which, when they come in, must necessarily enlarge and modify, though
without abolishing, these first reconciliations.
\par Twofold, says Krishna, is the self-application of the soul by which it
enters into the Brahmic condition: “that of the Sankhyas by the Yoga of
knowledge, that of the Yogins by the Yoga of works.” This identification of
Sankhya with Jnanayoga and of Yoga with the way of works is interesting;
for it shows that quite a different order of ideas prevailed at that time from
those we now possess as the result of the great Vedantic development of
Indian thought, subsequent evidently to the composition of the Gita, by which
the other Vedic philosophies fell into desuetude as practical methods of
liberation. To justify the language of the Gita we must suppose that at that
time it was the Sankhya method which was very commonly
\note{The systems of the Puranas and Tantras are full of the ideas of the
Sankhya, though subordinated to the Vedantic idea and mingled with many
others.} adopted by those who followed the path of knowledge.
Subsequently, with the spread of Buddhism, the Sankhya method of
knowledge must have been much overshadowed by the Buddhistic.
Buddhism, like the Sankhya non-Theistic and anti-Monistic, laid stress on the
impermanence of the results of the cosmic energy, which it presented not as
Prakriti but as Karma because the Buddhists admitted neither the Vedantic
Brahman nor the inactive Soul of the Sankhyas, and it made the recognition
of this impermanence by the discriminating mind its means of liberation.
When the reaction against Buddhism arrived, it took up not the old Sankhya
notion, but the Vedantic form popularised by Shankara who replaced the
Buddhistic impermanence by the cognate Vedantic idea of illusion, Maya, and
the Buddhistic idea of Non-Being, indefinable Nirvana, a negative Absolute,
by the opposite and yet cognate Vedantic idea of the indefinable Being,
Brahman, an ineffably positive Absolute in which all feature and action and
energy cease because in That they never really existed and are mere illusions
of the mind. It is the method of Shankara based upon these concepts of his
philosophy, it is the renunciation of life as an illusion of which we ordinarily
think when we speak
Page 84

now of the Yoga of knowledge. But in the time of the Gita Maya was
evidently not yet quite the master word of the Vedantic philosophy, nor had it,
at least with any decisive clearness, the connotation which Shankara brought
out of it with such a luminous force and distinctness; for in the Gita there is
little talk of Maya and much of Prakriti and, even, the former word is used as
little more than an equivalent of the latter but only in its inferior status; it is
the lower Prakriti of the three gunas, \s{traigu\,nyamay\=i m\=ay\=a}. Prakriti, not
illusive Maya, is in the teaching of the Gita the effective cause of cosmic
existence.
\par Still, whatever the precise distinctions of their metaphysical ideas, the
practical difference between the Sankhya and Yoga as developed by the Gita
is the same as that which now exists between the Vedantic Yogas of
knowledge and of works, and the practical results of the difference are also
the same. The Sankhya proceeded like the Vedantic Yoga of knowledge by
the Buddhi, by the discriminating intelligence; it arrived by reflective thought,
\s{vic\=ara}, at right discrimination, \s{viveka}, of the true nature of the soul
and of the imposition on it of the works of Prakriti through attachment and
identification, just as the Vedantic method arrives by the same means at the
right discrimination of the true nature of the Self and of the imposition on it of
cosmic appearances by mental illusion which leads to egoistic identification
and attachment. In the Vedantic method Maya ceases for the soul by its
return to its true and eternal status as the one Self, the Brahman, and the
cosmic action disappears; in the Sankhya method the working of the
\s{gu\,nas} falls to rest by the return of the soul to its true and eternal status as
the inactive Purusha and the cosmic action ends. The Brahman of the
Mayavadins is silent, immutable and inactive; so too is the Purusha of the
Sankhya; therefore for both ascetic renunciation of life and works is a
necessary means of liberation. But for the Yoga of the Gita, as for the
Vedantic Yoga of works, action is not only a preparation but itself the means
of liberation; and it is the justice of this view which the Gita seeks to bring out
with such an unceasing force and insistence,—an insistence, unfortunately,
which could not prevail in India against the tremendous
Page 85

tide of Buddhism,
\note{At the same time the Gita seems to have largely influenced Mahayanist
Buddhism and texts are taken bodily from it into the Buddhist Scriptures. It
may therefore have helped largely to turn Buddhism, originally a school of
quietistic and illuminated ascetics, into that religion of meditative devotion and
compassionate action which has so powerfully influenced Asiatic culture.}
was lost afterwards in the intensity of ascetic illusionism and the fervour of
world-shunning saints and devotees and is only now beginning to exercise its
real and salutary influence on the Indian mind. Renunciation is indispensable,
but the true renunciation is the inner rejection of desire and egoism; without
that the outer physical abandoning of works is a thing unreal and ineffective,
with it it ceases even to be necessary, although it is not forbidden.
Knowledge is essential, there is no higher force for liberation, but works with
knowledge are also needed; by the union of knowledge and works the soul
dwells entirely in the Brahmic status not only in repose and inactive calm, but
in the very midst and stress and violence of action. Devotion is all-important,
but works with devotion are also important; by the union of knowledge,
devotion and works the soul is taken up into the highest status of the Ishwara
to dwell there in the Purushottama who is master at once of the eternal
spiritual calm and the eternal cosmic activity. This is the synthesis of the Gita.
\par But, apart from the distinction between the Sankhya way of knowledge
and the Yoga way of works, there was another and similar opposition in the
Vedanta itself, and this also the Gita has to deal with, to correct and to fuse
into its large restatement of the Aryan spiritual culture. This was the
distinction between Karmakanda and Jnanakanda, between the original
thought that led to the philosophy of the Purva Mimansa, the Vedavada, and
that which led to the philosophy of the Uttara Mimansa,
\note{Jaimini's idea of liberation is the eternal Brahmaloka in which the soul
that has come to know Brahman still possesses a divine body and divine
enjoyments. For the Gita the Brahmaloka is not liberation; the soul must pass
beyond to the supracosmic status.} the Brahmavada, between those who
dwelt in the tradition of the Vedic hymns and the Vedic sacrifice and those
who put these aside as a lower knowledge and laid stress on the lofty
metaphysical knowledge which emerges from the Upanishads.
Page 86

For the pragmatic mind of the Vedavadins the Aryan religion of the Rishis
meant the strict performance of the Vedic sacrifices and the use of the
sacred Vedic mantras in order to possess all human desires in this world,
wealth, progeny, victory, every kind of good fortune, and the joys of
immortality in Paradise beyond. For the idealism of the Brahmavadins this
was only a preliminary preparation and the real object of man, true
\s{puru\,s\=artha}, began with his turning to the knowledge of the Brahman
which would give him the true immortality of an ineffable spiritual bliss far
beyond the lower joys of this world or of any inferior heaven. Whatever may
have been the true and original sense of the Veda, this was the distinction
which had long established itself and with which therefore the Gita has to
deal.
\par Almost the first word of the synthesis of works and knowledge is a
strong, almost a violent censure and repudiation of the Vedavada, “this
flowery word which they declare who have not clear discernment, devoted to
the creed of the Veda, whose creed is that there is nothing else, souls of
desire, seekers of Paradise,—it gives the fruits of the works of birth, it is
multifarious with specialities of rites, it is directed to enjoyment and lordship
as its goal.” The Gita even seems to go on to attack the Veda itself which,
though it has been practically cast aside, is still to Indian sentiment intangible,
inviolable, the sacred origin and authority for all its philosophy and religion.
“The action of the three gunas is the subject matter of the Veda; but do thou
become free from the triple guna, O Arjuna.” The Vedas in the widest terms,
“all the Vedas”,—which might well include the Upanishads also and seems to
include them, for the general term \s{\'Sruti} is used later on,—are declared to
be unnecessary for the man who knows. “As much use as there is in a well
with water in flood on every side, so much is there in all the Vedas for the
Brahmin who has the knowledge.” Nay, the Scriptures are even a
stumbling-block; for the letter of the Word—perhaps because of its conflict
of texts and its various and mutually dissentient interpretations—bewilders
the understanding, which can only find certainty and concentration by the
light within. “When thy intelligence shall cross beyond the whorl of delusion,
then shalt thou become
Page 87

indifferent to Scripture heard or that which thou hast yet to hear, \s{gant\=asi
nirveda\.m \'srotavyasya \'srutasya ca}. When thy intelligence which is
bewildered by the Sruti, \s{\'srutivipratipann\=a}, shall stand unmoving and stable
in Samadhi, then shalt thou attain to Yoga.” So offensive is all this to
conventional religious sentiment that attempts are naturally made by the
convenient and indispensable human faculty of text-twisting to put a different
sense on some of these verses, but the meaning is plain and hangs together
from beginning to end. It is confirmed and emphasised by a subsequent
passage in which the knowledge of the knower is described as passing
beyond the range of Veda and Upanishad, \s{\'sabdabrahm\=ativartate}.
\par Let us see, however, what all this means; for we may be sure that a
synthetic and catholic system like the Gita's will not treat such important parts
of the Aryan culture in a spirit of mere negation and repudiation. The Gita
has to synthetise the Yoga doctrine of liberation by works and the Sankhya
doctrine of liberation by knowledge; it has to fuse \s{karma} with \s{j\~n\=ana}.
It has at the same time to synthetise the Purusha and Prakriti idea common to
Sankhya and Yoga with the Brahmavada of the current Vedanta in which the
Purusha, Deva, Ishwara,—supreme Soul, God, Lord,—of the Upanishads all
became merged in the one all-swallowing concept of the immutable
Brahman; and it has to bring out again from its overshadowing by that
concept but not with any denial of it the Yoga idea of the Lord or Ishwara. It
has too its own luminous thought to add, the crown of its synthetic system,
the doctrine of the Purushottama and of the triple Purusha for which, though
the idea is there, no precise and indisputable authority can be easily found in
the Upanishads and which seems indeed at first sight to be in contradiction
with that text of the Sruti where only two Purushas are recognised.
Moreover, in synthetising works and knowledge it has to take account not
only of the opposition of Yoga and Sankhya, but of the opposition of works to
knowledge in Vedanta itself, where the connotation of the two words and
therefore their point of conflict is not quite the same as the point of the
Sankhya-Yoga opposition. It is not surprising at all, one may observe in
passing,
Page 88

that with the conflict of so many philosophical schools all founding themselves
on the texts of the Veda and Upanishads, the Gita should describe the
understanding as being perplexed and confused, led in different directions by
the Sruti, \s{\'srutivipratipann\=a}. What battles are even now delivered by
Indian pundits and metaphysicians over the meaning of the ancient texts and
to what different conclusions they lead! The understanding may well get
disgusted and indifferent, \s{gant\=asi nirvedam}, refuse to hear any more texts
new or old, \s{\'srotavyasya \'srutasya ca}, and go into itself to discover the
truth in the light of a deeper and inner and direct experience.
\par In the first six chapters the Gita lays a large foundation for its synthesis
of works and knowledge, its synthesis of Sankhya, Yoga and Vedanta. But
first it finds that \s{karma}, works, has a particular sense in the language of
the Vedantins; it means the Vedic sacrifices and ceremonies or at most that
and the ordering of life according to the Grihyasutras in which these rites are
the most important part, the religious kernel of the life. By works the
Vedantins understood these religious works, the sacrificial system, the
\s{yaj\~na}, full of a careful order, \s{vidhi}, of exact and complicated rites,
\s{kriy\=a-vi\'se\,sa-bahul\=am}. But in Yoga works had a much wider significance.
The Gita insists on this wider significance; in our conception of spiritual
activity all works have to be included, \s{sarva-karm\=a\,ni}. At the same time it
does not, like Buddhism, reject the idea of the sacrifice, it prefers to uplift and
enlarge it. Yes, it says in effect, not only is sacrifice, \s{yaj\~na}, the most
important part of life, but all life, all works should be regarded as sacrifice,
are \s{yaj\~na}, though by the ignorant they are performed without the higher
knowledge and by the most ignorant not in the true order,
\s{avidhi-p\=urvakam}. Sacrifice is the very condition of life; with sacrifice as
their eternal companion the Father of creatures created the peoples. But the
sacrifices of the Vedavadins are offerings of desire directed towards material
rewards, desire eager for the result of works, desire looking to a larger
enjoyment in Paradise as immortality and highest salvation. This the system
of the Gita cannot admit; for that in its very inception starts with the
renunciation of desire, with its
Page 89

rejection and destruction as the enemy of the soul. The Gita does not deny
the validity even of the Vedic sacrificial works; it admits them, it admits that
by these means one may get enjoyment here and Paradise beyond; it is I
myself, says the divine Teacher, who accept these sacrifices and to whom
they are offered, I who give these fruits in the form of the gods since so men
choose to approach me. But this is not the true road, nor is the enjoyment of
Paradise the liberation and fulfilment which man has to seek. It is the
ignorant who worship the gods, not knowing whom they are worshipping
ignorantly in these divine forms; for they are worshipping, though in
ignorance, the One, the Lord, the only Deva, and it is he who accepts their
offering. To that Lord must the sacrifice be offered, the true sacrifice of all
the life's energies and activities, with devotion, without desire, for His sake
and for the welfare of the peoples. It is because the Vedavada obscures this
truth and with its tangle of ritual ties man down to the action of the three
gunas that it has to be so severely censured and put roughly aside; but its
central idea is not destroyed; transfigured and uplifted, it is turned into a most
important part of the true spiritual experience and of the method of liberation.
\par The Vedantic idea of knowledge does not present the same difficulties.
The Gita takes it over at once and completely and throughout the six chapters
quietly substitutes the still immutable Brahman of the Vedantins, the One
without a second immanent in all cosmos, for the still immutable but multiple
Purusha of the Sankhyas. It accepts throughout these chapters knowledge
and realisation of the Brahman as the most important, the indispensable
means of liberation, even while it insists on desireless works as an essential
part of knowledge. It accepts equally Nirvana of the ego in the infinite
equality of the immutable, impersonal Brahman as essential to liberation; it
practically identifies this extinction with the Sankhya return of the inactive
immutable Purusha upon itself when it emerges out of identification with the
actions of Prakriti; it combines and fuses the language of the Vedanta with
the language of the Sankhya, as had already indeed been done by certain of
the
Page 90

Upanishads.
\note{Especially the Swetaswatara.} But still there is a defect in the
Vedantic position which has to be overcome. We may, perhaps, conjecture
that at this time the Vedanta had not yet redeveloped the later theistic
tendencies which in the Upanishads are already present as an element, but
not so prominent as in the Vaishnava philosophies of the later Vedantins
where they become indeed not only prominent but paramount. We may take
it that the orthodox Vedanta was, at any rate in its main tendencies,
pantheistic at the basis, monistic at the summit.
\note{The pantheistic formula is that God and the All are one, the monistic
adds that God or Brahman alone exists and the cosmos is only an illusory
appearance or else a real but partial manifestation.} It knew of the Brahman,
one without a second; it knew of the Gods, Vishnu, Shiva, Brahma and the
rest, who all resolve themselves into the Brahman; but the one supreme
Brahman as the one Ishwara, Purusha, Deva—words often applied to it in
the Upanishads and justifying to that extent, yet passing beyond the Sankhya
and the theistic conceptions—was an idea that had fallen from its pride of
place;
\note{This is a little doubtful, but we may say at least that there was a strong
tendency in that direction of which Shankara's philosophy was the last
culmination.} the names could only be applied in a strictly logical
Brahmavada to subordinate or inferior phases of the Brahman-idea. The Gita
proposes not only to restore the original equality of these names and
therefore of the conceptions they indicate, but to go a step farther. The
Brahman in its supreme and not in any lower aspect has to be presented as
the Purusha with the lower Prakriti for its Maya, so to synthetise thoroughly
Vedanta and Sankhya, and as Ishwara, so to synthetise thoroughly both with
Yoga; but the Gita is going to represent the Ishwara, the Purushottama, as
higher even than the still and immutable Brahman, and the loss of ego in the
impersonal comes in at the beginning as only a great initial and necessary
step towards union with the Purushottama. For the Purushottama is the
supreme Brahman. It therefore passes boldly beyond the Veda and the
Upanishads as they were taught by their best authorised exponents and
affirms a teaching of its own which it has developed from them,
Page 91

but which may not be capable of being fitted in within the four corners of
their meaning as ordinarily interpreted by the Vedantins.
\note{\relax In reality the idea of the Purushottama is already announced in
the Upanishads, though in a more scattered fashion than in the Gita and, as in
the Gita, the Supreme Brahman or Supreme Purusha is constantly described
as containing in himself the opposition of the Brahman with qualities and
without qualities, \s{nirgu\,no gu\,n\=i}. He is not one of these things to the
exclusion of the other which seems to our intellect to be its contrary.} In fact
without this free and synthetic dealing with the letter of the Scripture a work
of large synthesis in the then state of conflict between numerous schools and
with the current methods of Vedic exegesis would have been impossible.
\par The Gita in later chapters speaks highly of the Veda and the
Upanishads. They are divine Scriptures, they are the Word. The Lord himself
is the knower of Veda and the author of Vedanta, \s{vedavid ved\=antak\,rt};
the Lord is the one object of knowledge in all the Vedas, \s{sarvair vedair
aham eva vedya\,h}, a language which implies that the word Veda means the
book of knowledge and that these Scriptures deserve their appellation. The
Purushottama from his high supremacy above the Immutable and the mutable
has extended himself in the world and in the Veda. Still the letter of the
Scripture binds and confuses, as the apostle of Christianity warned his
disciples when he said that the letter killeth and it is the spirit that saves; and
there is a point beyond which the utility of the Scripture itself ceases. The
real source of knowledge is the Lord in the heart; “I am seated in the heart of
every man and from me is knowledge,” says the Gita; the Scripture is only a
verbal form of that inner Veda, of that self-luminous Reality, it is
\s{\'sabdabrahma}: the mantra, says the Veda, has risen from the heart, from
the secret place where is the seat of the truth, \s{sadan\=ad \,rtasya},
\s{guh\=ay\=am}. That origin is its sanction; but still the infinite Truth is greater
than its word. Nor shall you say of any Scripture that it alone is all-sufficient
and no other truth can be admitted, as the Vedavadins said of the Veda,
\s{n\=anyad ast\=iti v\=adina\,h}. This is a saving and liberating word which must be
applied to all the Scriptures of the world. Take all the Scriptures that are or
have been, Bible and Koran
Page 92

and the books of the Chinese, Veda and Upanishads and Purana and Tantra
and Shastra and the Gita itself and the sayings of thinkers and sages,
prophets and Avatars, still you shall not say that there is nothing else or that
the truth your intellect cannot find there is not true because you cannot find it
there. That is the limited thought of the sectarian or the composite thought of
the eclectic religionist, not the untrammelled truth-seeking of the free and
illumined mind and God-experienced soul. Heard or unheard before, that
always is the truth which is seen by the heart of man in its illumined depths or
heard within from the Master of all knowledge, the knower of the eternal
Veda.
Page 93

\par
\HN X
\par
\ht The Yoga of the Intelligent Will
\par\drop I have had to deviate in the last two essays and to drag the reader
with me into the arid tracts of metaphysical dogma,—however cursorily and
with a very insufficient and superficial treatment,—so that we might
understand why the Gita follows the peculiar line of development it has taken,
working out first a partial truth with only subdued hints of its deeper meaning,
then returning upon its hints and bringing out their significance until it rises to
its last great suggestion, its supreme mystery which it does not work out at
all, but leaves to be lived out, as the later ages of Indian spirituality tried to
live it out in great waves of love, of surrender, of ecstasy. Its eye is always
on its synthesis and all its strains are the gradual preparation of the mind for
its high closing note.
\par I have declared to you the poise of a self-liberating intelligence in
Sankhya, says the divine Teacher to Arjuna. I will now declare to you
another poise in Yoga. You are shrinking from the results of your works, you
desire other results and turn from your right path in life because it does not
lead you to them. But this idea of works and their result, desire of result as
the motive, the work as a means for the satisfaction of desire, is the bondage
of the ignorant who know not what works are, nor their true source, nor their
real operation, nor their high utility. My Yoga will free you from all bondage
of the soul to its works, \s{karmabandha\.m prah\=asyasi}. You are afraid of
many things, afraid of sin, afraid of suffering, afraid of hell and punishment,
afraid of God, afraid of this world, afraid of the hereafter, afraid of yourself.
What is it that you are not afraid of at this moment, you the Aryan fighter, the
world's chief hero? But this is the great fear which besieges humanity, its
fear of sin and suffering now and hereafter, its fear in a world of whose true
nature it is ignorant, of a God whose true being also it has not seen and
Page 94

whose cosmic purpose it does not understand. My Yoga will deliver you from
the great fear and even a little of it will bring deliverance. When you have
once set out on this path, you will find that no step is lost; every least
movement will be a gain; you will find there no obstacle that can baulk you of
your advance. A bold and absolute promise and one to which the fearful and
hesitating mind beset and stumbling in all its paths cannot easily lend an
assured trust; nor is the large and full truth of it apparent unless with these
first words of the message of the Gita we read also the last, “Abandon all
laws of conduct and take refuge in Me alone; I will deliver you from all sin
and evil; do not grieve.”
\par But it is not with this deep and moving word of God to man, but rather
with the first necessary rays of light on the path, directed not like that to the
soul, but to the intellect, that the exposition begins. Not the Friend and Lover
of man speaks first, but the guide and teacher who has to remove from him
his ignorance of his true self and of the nature of the world and of the springs
of his own action. For it is because he acts ignorantly, with a wrong
intelligence and therefore a wrong will in these matters, that man is or seems
to be bound by his works; otherwise works are no bondage to the free soul. It
is because of this wrong intelligence that he has hope and fear, wrath and
grief and transient joy; otherwise works are possible with a perfect serenity
and freedom. Therefore it is the Yoga of the buddhi, the intelligence, that is
first enjoined on Arjuna. To act with right intelligence and, therefore, a right
will, fixed in the One, aware of the one self in all and acting out of its equal
serenity, not running about in different directions under the thousand impulses
of our superficial mental self, is the Yoga of the intelligent will.
\par There are, says the Gita, two types of intelligence in the human being.
The first is concentrated, poised, one, homogeneous, directed singly towards
the Truth; unity is its characteristic, concentrated fixity is its very being. In
the other there is no single will, no unified intelligence, but only an endless
number of ideas many-branching, coursing about, that is to say, in this or that
direction in pursuit of the desires which are offered to it by life and by the
environment. Buddhi, the word used, means, properly
Page 95

speaking, the mental power of understanding but it is evidently used by the
Gita in a large philosophic sense for the whole action of the discriminating
and deciding mind which determines both the direction and use of our
thoughts and the direction and use of our acts; thought, intelligence, judgment,
perceptive choice and aim are all included in its functioning: for the
characteristic of the unified intelligence is not only concentration of the mind
that knows, but especially concentration of the mind that decides and persists
in the decision, \s{vyavas\=aya}, while the sign of the dissipated intelligence is
not so much even discursiveness of the ideas and perceptions as
discursiveness of the aims and desires, therefore of the will. Will, then, and
knowledge are the two functions of the Buddhi. The unified intelligent will is
fixed in the enlightened soul, it is concentrated in inner self-knowledge; the
many-branching and multifarious, busied with many things, careless of the
one thing needful is on the contrary subject to the restless and discursive
action of the mind, dispersed in outward life and works and their fruits.
“Works are far inferior,” says the Teacher, “to Yoga of the intelligence;
desire rather refuge in the intelligence; poor and wretched souls are they who
make the fruit of their works the object of their thoughts and activities.”
\par We must remember the psychological order of the Sankhya which the
Gita accepts. On one side there is the Purusha, the soul calm, inactive,
immutable, one, not evolutive; on the other side there is Prakriti or
Nature-force inert without the conscious Soul, active but only by juxtaposition
to that consciousness, by contact with it, as we would say, not so much one
at first as indeterminate, triple in its qualities, capable of evolution and
involution. The contact of soul and nature generates the play of subjectivity
and objectivity which is our experience of being; what is to us the subjective
first evolves, because the soul-consciousness is the first cause, inconscient
Nature-force only the second and dependent cause; but still it is Nature and
not Soul which supplies the instruments of our subjectivity. First in order
come Buddhi, discriminative or determinative power evolving out of
Nature-force, and its subordinate power of self-discriminating ego. Then as a
secondary evolution there arises
Page 96

out of these the power which seizes the discriminations of objects,
sense-mind or Manas,—we must record the Indian names because the
corresponding English words are not real equivalents. As a tertiary evolution
out of sense-mind we have the specialising organic senses, ten in number,
five of perception, five of action; next the powers of each sense of
perception, sound, form, scent, etc., which give their value to objects for the
mind and make things what they are to our subjectivity,—and, as the
substantial basis of these, the primary conditions of the objects of sense, the
five elements of ancient philosophy or rather elementary conditions of
Nature, \s{pa\~nca bh\=uta}, which constitute objects by their various
combination.
\par Reflected in the pure consciousness of Purusha these degrees and
powers of Nature-force become the material of our impure subjectivity,
impure because its action is dependent on the perceptions of the objective
world and on their subjective reactions. Buddhi, which is simply the
determinative power that determines all inertly out of indeterminate
inconscient Force, takes for us the form of intelligence and will. Manas, the
inconscient force which seizes Nature's discriminations by objective action
and reaction and grasps at them by attraction, becomes sense-perception and
desire, the two crude terms or degradations of intelligence and
will,—becomes the sense-mind sensational, emotive, volitional in the lower
sense of wish, hope, longing, passion, vital impulsion, all the deformations
(\s{vik\=ara}) of will. The senses become the instruments of sense-mind, the
perceptive five of our sense-knowledge, the active five of our impulsions and
vital habits, mediators between the subjective and objective; the rest are the
objects of our consciousness, \s{vi\,sayas} of the senses.
\par This order of evolution seems contrary to that which we perceive as the
order of the material evolution; but if we remember that even Buddhi is in
itself an inert action of inconscient Nature and that there is certainly in this
sense an inconscient will and intelligence, a discriminative and determinative
force even in the atom, if we observe the crude inconscient stuff of
sensation, emotion, memory, impulsion in the plant and in the subconscient
forms of existence, if we look at these powers
Page 97

of Nature-force assuming the forms of our subjectivity in the evolving
consciousness of animal and man, we shall see that the Sankhya system
squares well enough with all that modern enquiry has elicited by its
observation of material Nature. In the evolution of the soul back from Prakriti
towards Purusha, the reverse order has to be taken to the original
Nature-evolution, and that is how the Upanishads and the Gita following and
almost quoting the Upanishads state the ascending order of our subjective
powers. “Supreme, they say,” beyond their objects “are the senses, supreme
over the senses the mind, supreme over the mind the intelligent will: that
which is supreme over the intelligent will, is he,”—is the conscious self, the
Purusha. Therefore, says the Gita, it is this Purusha, this supreme cause of
our subjective life which we have to understand and become aware of by the
intelligence; in that we have to fix our will. So holding our lower subjective
self in Nature firmly poised and stilled by means of the greater really
conscient self, we can destroy the restless ever-active enemy of our peace
and self-mastery, the mind's desire.
\par For evidently there are two possibilities of the action of the intelligent
will. It may take its downward and outward orientation towards a discursive
action of the perceptions and the will in the triple play of Prakriti, or it may
take its upward and inward orientation towards a settled peace and equality
in the calm and immutable purity of the conscious silent soul no longer subject
to the distractions of Nature. In the former alternative the subjective being is
at the mercy of the objects of sense, it lives in the outward contact of things.
That life is the life of desire. For the senses excited by their objects create a
restless or often violent disturbance, a strong or even headlong outward
movement towards the seizure of these objects and their enjoyment, and they
carry away the sense-mind, “as the winds carry away a ship upon the sea”;
the mind subjected to the emotions, passions, longings, impulsions awakened
by this outward movement of the senses carries away similarly the intelligent
will, which loses therefore its power of calm discrimination and mastery.
Subjection of the soul to the confused play
Page 98

of the three gunas of Prakriti in their eternal entangled twining and wrestling,
ignorance, a false, sensuous, objective life of the soul, enslavement to grief
and wrath and attachment and passion, are the results of the downward trend
of the buddhi,—the troubled life of the ordinary, unenlightened, undisciplined
man. Those who like the Vedavadins make sense-enjoyment the object of
action and its fulfilment the highest aim of the soul, are misleading guides.
The inner subjective self-delight independent of objects is our true aim and
the high and wide poise of our peace and liberation.
\par Therefore, it is the upward and inward orientation of the intelligent will
that we must resolutely choose with a settled concentration and
perseverance, \s{vyavas\=aya}; we must fix it firmly in the calm
self-knowledge of the Purusha. The first movement must be obviously to get
rid of desire which is the whole root of the evil and suffering; and in order to
get rid of desire, we must put an end to the cause of desire, the rushing out of
the senses to seize and enjoy their objects. We must draw them back when
they are inclined thus to rush out, draw them away from their objects,—as
the tortoise draws in his limbs into the shell, so these into their source,
quiescent in the mind, the mind quiescent in intelligence, the intelligence
quiescent in the soul and its self-knowledge, observing the action of Nature,
but not subject to it, not desiring anything that the objective life can give.
\par It is not an external asceticism, the physical renunciation of the objects
of sense that I am teaching, suggests Krishna immediately to avoid a
misunderstanding which is likely at once to arise. Not the renunciation of the
Sankhyas or the austerities of the rigid ascetic with his fasts, his maceration
of the body, his attempt to abstain even from food; that is not the
self-discipline or the abstinence which I mean, for I speak of an inner
withdrawal, a renunciation of desire. The embodied soul, having a body, has
to support it normally by food for its normal physical action; by abstention
from food it simply removes from itself the physical contact with the object of
sense, but does not get rid of the inner relation which makes that contact
hurtful. It retains the pleasure of the sense in the object, the \s{rasa}, the
Page 99

liking and disliking,—for \s{rasa} has two sides; the soul must, on the
contrary, be capable of enduring the physical contact without suffering
inwardly this sensuous reaction. Otherwise there is \s{niv\,rtti}, cessation of
the object, \s{vi\,say\=a vinivartante}, but no subjective cessation, no \s{niv\,rtti}
of the mind; but the senses are of the mind, subjective, and subjective
cessation of the \s{rasa} is the only real sign of mastery. But how is this
desireless contact with objects, this unsensuous use of the senses possible? It
is possible, \s{para\.m d\,r\,s\,tv\=a}, by the vision of the supreme,—\s{param}, the
Soul, the Purusha,—and by living in the Yoga, in union or oneness of the
whole subjective being with that, through the Yoga of the intelligence; for the
one Soul is calm, satisfied in its own delight, and that delight free from duality
can take, once we see this supreme thing in us and fix the mind and will on
that, the place of the sensuous object-ridden pleasures and repulsions of the
mind. This is the true way of liberation.
\par Certainly self-discipline, self-control is never easy. All intelligent human
beings know that they must exercise some control over themselves and
nothing is more common than this advice to control the senses; but ordinarily
it is only advised imperfectly and practised imperfectly in the most limited and
insufficient fashion. Even, however, the sage, the man of clear, wise and
discerning soul who really labours to acquire complete self-mastery finds
himself hurried and carried away by the senses. That is because the mind
naturally lends itself to the senses; it observes the objects of sense with an
inner interest, settles upon them and makes them the object of absorbing
thought for the intelligence and of strong interest for the will. By that
attachment comes, by attachment desire, by desire distress, passion and
anger when the desire is not satisfied or is thwarted or opposed, and by
passion the soul is obscured, the intelligence and will forget to see and be
seated in the calm observing soul; there is a fall from the memory of one's
true self, and by that lapse the intelligent will is also obscured, destroyed
even. For, for the time being, it no longer exists to our memory of ourselves, it
disappears in a cloud of passion; we become passion, wrath, grief and cease
to be self and intelligence and will. This then must be prevented
Page 100

and all the senses brought utterly under control; for only by an absolute
control of the senses can the wise and calm intelligence be firmly established
in its proper seat.
\par This cannot be done perfectly by the act of the intelligence itself, by a
merely mental self-discipline; it can only be done by Yoga with something
which is higher than itself and in which calm and self-mastery are inherent.
And this Yoga can only arrive at its success by devoting, by consecrating, by
giving up the whole self to the Divine, “to Me”, says Krishna; for the
Liberator is within us, but it is not our mind, nor our intelligence, nor our
personal will,—they are only instruments. It is the Lord in whom, as we are
told in the end, we have utterly to take refuge. And for that we must at first
make him the object of our whole being and keep in soul-contact with him.
This is the sense of the phrase “he must sit firm in Yoga, wholly given up to
Me”; but as yet it is the merest passing hint after the manner of the Gita,
three words only which contain in seed the whole gist of the highest secret
yet to be developed. \s{Yukta} \s{\=as\=ita matpara\,h}.
\par If this is done, then it becomes possible to move among the objects of
sense, in contact with them, acting on them, but with the senses entirely
under the control of the subjective self,—not at the mercy of the objects and
their contacts and reactions,—and that self again obedient to the highest self,
the Purusha. Then, free from reactions, the senses will be delivered from the
affections of liking and disliking, escape the duality of positive and negative
desire, and calm, peace, clearness, happy tranquillity, \s{\=atmapras\=ada}, will
settle upon the man. That clear tranquillity is the source of the soul's felicity;
all grief begins to lose its power of touching the tranquil soul; the intelligence
is rapidly established in the peace of the self; suffering is destroyed. It is this
calm, desireless, griefless fixity of the buddhi in self-poise and self-knowledge
to which the Gita gives the name of Samadhi.
\par The sign of the man in Samadhi is not that he loses consciousness of
objects and surroundings and of his mental and physical self and cannot be
recalled to it even by burning or torture of the body,—the ordinary idea of the
matter; trance
Page 101

is a particular intensity, not the essential sign. The test is the expulsion of all
desires, their inability to get at the mind, and it is the inner state from which
this freedom arises, the delight of the soul gathered within itself with the mind
equal and still and high-poised above the attractions and repulsions, the
alternations of sunshine and storm and stress of the external life. It is drawn
inward even when acting outwardly; it is concentrated in self even when
gazing out upon things; it is directed wholly to the Divine even when to the
outward vision of others busy and preoccupied with the affairs of the world.
Arjuna, voicing the average human mind, asks for some outward, physical,
practically discernible sign of this great Samadhi; how does such a man
speak, how sit, how walk? No such signs can be given, nor does the Teacher
attempt to supply them; for the only possible test of its possession is inward
and that there are plenty of hostile psychological forces to apply. Equality is
the great stamp of the liberated soul and of that equality even the most
discernible signs are still subjective. “A man with mind untroubled by
sorrows, who has done with desire for pleasures, from whom liking and
wrath and fear have passed away, such is the sage whose understanding has
become founded in stability.” He is “without the triple action of the qualities
of Prakriti, without the dualities, ever based in his true being, without getting
or having, possessed of his self.” For what gettings and havings has the free
soul? Once we are possessed of the Self, we are in possession of all things.
\par And yet he does not cease from work and action. There is the originality
and power of the Gita, that having affirmed this static condition, this
superiority to nature, this emptiness even of all that constitutes ordinarily the
action of Nature for the liberated soul, it is still able to vindicate for it, to
enjoin on it even the continuance of works and thus avoid the great defect of
the merely quietistic and ascetic philosophies,—the defect from which we
find them today attempting to escape. “Thou hast a right to action, but only to
action, never to its fruits; let not the fruits of thy works be thy motive, neither
let there be in thee any attachment to inactivity.” Therefore it is not the
works practised with desire by the Vedavadins, it is not the
Page 102

claim for the satisfaction of the restless and energetic mind by a constant
activity, the claim made by the practical or the kinetic man, which is here
enjoined. “Fixed in Yoga do thy actions, having abandoned attachment,
having become equal in failure and success; for it is equality that is meant by
Yoga.” Action is distressed by the choice between a relative good and evil,
the fear of sin and the difficult endeavour towards virtue? But the liberated
who has united his reason and will with the Divine, casts away from him
even here in this world of dualities both good doing and evil doing; for he rises
to a higher law beyond good and evil, founded in the liberty of
self-knowledge. Such desireless action can have no decisiveness, no
effectiveness, no efficient motive, no large or vigorous creative power? Not
so; action done in Yoga is not only the highest but the wisest, the most potent
and efficient even for the affairs of the world; for it is informed by the
knowledge and will of the Master of works: “Yoga is skill in works.” But all
action directed towards life leads away from the universal aim of the Yogin
which is by common consent to escape from bondage to this distressed and
sorrowful human birth? Not so, either; the sages who do works without
desire for fruits and in Yoga with the Divine are liberated from the bondage
of birth and reach that other perfect status in which there are none of the
maladies which afflict the mind and life of a suffering humanity.
\par The status he reaches is the Brahmic condition; he gets to firm standing
in the Brahman, \s{br\=ahm\=i} \s{sthiti}. It is a reversal of the whole view,
experience, knowledge, values, seeings of earth-bound creatures. This life of
the dualities which is to them their day, their waking, their consciousness,
their bright condition of activity and knowledge, is to him a night, a troubled
sleep and darkness of the soul; that higher being which is to them a night, a
sleep in which all knowledge and will cease, is to the self-mastering sage his
waking, his luminous day of true being, knowledge and power. They are
troubled and muddy waters disturbed by every little inrush of desire; he is an
ocean of wide being and consciousness which is ever being filled, yet ever
motionless in its large poise of his soul; all the desires of the
Page 103

world enter into him as waters into the sea, yet he has no desire nor is
troubled. For while they are filled with the troubling sense of ego and mine
and thine, he is one with the one Self in all and has no “I” or “mine”. He acts
as others, but he has abandoned all desires and their longings. He attains to
the great peace and is not bewildered by the shows of things; he has
extinguished his individual ego in the One, lives in that unity and, fixed in that
status at his end, can attain to extinction in the Brahman, Nirvana,—not the
negative self-annihilation of the Buddhists, but the great immergence of the
separate personal self into the vast reality of the one infinite impersonal
Existence.
\par Such, subtly unifying Sankhya, Yoga and Vedanta, is the first foundation
of the teaching of the Gita. It is far from being all, but it is the first
indispensable practical unity of knowledge and works with a hint already of
the third crowning intensest element in the soul's completeness, divine love
and devotion.
Page 104

\par
\HN XI
\par
\ht Works and Sacrifice
\par\drop The Yoga of the intelligent will and its culmination in the Brahmic
status, which occupies all the close of the second chapter, contains the seed
of much of the teaching of the Gita,—its doctrine of desireless works, of
equality, of the rejection of outward renunciation, of devotion to the Divine;
but as yet all this is slight and obscure. What is most strongly emphasised as
yet is the withdrawal of the will from the ordinary motive of human activities,
desire, from man's normal temperament of the sense-seeking thought and will
with its passions and ignorance, and from its customary habit of troubled
many-branching ideas and wishes to the desireless calm unity and passionless
serenity of the Brahmic poise. So much Arjuna has understood. He is not
unfamiliar with all this; it is the substance of the current teaching which points
man to the path of knowledge and to the renunciation of life and works as his
way of perfection. The intelligence withdrawing from sense and desire and
human action and turning to the Highest, to the One, to the actionless
Purusha, to the immobile, to the featureless Brahman, that surely is the
eternal seed of knowledge. There is no room here for works, since works
belong to the Ignorance; action is the very opposite of knowledge; its seed is
desire and its fruit is bondage. That is the orthodox philosophical doctrine, and
Krishna seems quite to admit it when he says that works are far inferior to
the Yoga of the intelligence. And yet works are insisted upon as part of the
Yoga; so that there seems to be in this teaching a radical inconsistency. Not
only so; for some kind of work no doubt may persist for a while, the
minimum, the most inoffensive; but here is a work wholly inconsistent with
knowledge, with serenity and with the motionless peace of the self-delighted
soul,—a work terrible, even monstrous, a bloody strife, a ruthless battle, a
giant massacre. Yet it is this that is
Page 105

enjoined, this that it is sought to justify by the teaching of inner peace and
desireless equality and status in the Brahman! Here then is an unreconciled
contradiction. Arjuna complains that he has been given a contradictory and
confusing doctrine, not the clear, strenuously single road by which the human
intelligence can move straight and trenchantly to the supreme good. It is in
answer to this objection that the Gita begins at once to develop more clearly
its positive and imperative doctrine of Works.
\par The Teacher first makes a distinction between the two means of
salvation on which in this world men can concentrate separately, the Yoga of
knowledge, the Yoga of works, the one implying, it is usually supposed,
renunciation of works as an obstacle to salvation, the other accepting works
as a means of salvation. He does not yet insist strongly on any fusion of
them, on any reconciliation of the thought that divides them, but begins by
showing that the renunciation of the Sankhyas, the physical renunciation,
Sannyasa, is neither the only way, nor at all the better way. \s{Nai\,skarmya},
a calm voidness from works, is no doubt that to which the soul, the Purusha
has to attain; for it is Prakriti which does the work and the soul has to rise
above involution in the activities of the being and attain to a free serenity and
poise watching over the operations of Prakriti, but not affected by them.
That, and not cessation of the works of Prakriti, is what is really meant by the
soul's \s{nai\,skarmya}. Therefore it is an error to think that by not engaging in
any kind of action this actionless state of the soul can be attained and
enjoyed. Mere renunciation of works is not a sufficient, not even quite a
proper means for salvation. “Not by abstention from works does a man enjoy
actionlessness, nor by mere renunciation (of works) does he attain to his
perfection,”—to \s{siddhi}, the accomplishment of the aims of his
self-discipline by Yoga.
\par But at least it must be one necessary means, indispensable, imperative?
For how, if the works of Prakriti continue, can the soul help being involved in
them? How can I fight and yet in my soul not think or feel that I the individual
am fighting, not desire victory nor be inwardly touched by defeat? This is the
teaching of
Page 106

the Sankhyas that the intelligence of the man who engages in the activities of
Nature, is entangled in egoism, ignorance and desire and therefore drawn to
action; on the contrary, if the intelligence draws back, then the action must
cease with the cessation of the desire and the ignorance. Therefore the
giving up of life and works is a necessary part, an inevitable circumstance
and an indispensable last means of the movement to liberation. This objection
of a current logic,—it is not expressed by Arjuna, but it is in his mind as the
turn of his subsequent utterances shows,—the Teacher immediately
anticipates. No, he says, such renunciation, far from being indispensable, is
not even possible. “For none stands even for a moment not doing work;
everyone is made to do action helplessly by the modes born of Prakriti.” The
strong perception of the great cosmic action and the eternal activity and
power of the cosmic energy which was so much emphasised afterwards by
the teaching of the Tantric Shaktas who even made Prakriti or Shakti
superior to Purusha, is a very remarkable feature of the Gita. Although here
an undertone, it is still strong enough, coupled with what we might call the
theistic and devotional elements of its thought, to bring in that activism which
so strongly modifies in its scheme of Yoga the quietistic tendencies of the old
metaphysical Vedanta. Man embodied in the natural world cannot cease
from action, not for a moment, not for a second; his very existence here is an
action; the whole universe is an act of God, mere living even is His
movement.
\par Our physical life, its maintenance, its continuance is a journey, a
pilgrimage of the body, \s{\'sar\=ira-y\=atr\=a}, and that cannot be effected without
action. But even if a man could leave his body unmaintained, otiose, if he
could stand still always like a tree or sit inert like a stone, \s{ti\,s\,thati}, that
vegetable or material immobility would not save him from the hands of
Nature; he would not be liberated from her workings. For it is not our
physical movements and activities alone which are meant by works, by
\s{karma}; our mental existence also is a great complex action, it is even the
greater and more important part of the works of the unresting
energy,—subjective cause and determinant of the physical. We have gained
nothing if we repress the effect but
Page 107

retain the activity of the subjective cause. The objects of sense are only an
occasion for our bondage, the mind's insistence on them is the means, the
instrumental cause. A man may control his organs of action and refuse to
give them their natural play, but he has gained nothing if his mind continues to
remember and dwell upon the objects of sense. Such a man has bewildered
himself with false notions of self-discipline; he has not understood its object
or its truth, nor the first principles of his subjective existence; therefore all his
methods of self-discipline are false and null.
\note{I cannot think that \s{mithy\=ac\=ara} means a hypocrite. How is a man a
hypocrite who inflicts on himself so severe and complete a privation? He is
mistaken and deluded, \s{vim\=u\,dh\=atm\=a}, and his \s{\=ac\=ara}, his formally
regulated method of self-discipline, is a false and vain method,—this surely is
all that the Gita means. } The body's actions, even the mind's actions are
nothing in themselves, neither a bondage, nor the first cause of bondage.
What is vital is the mighty energy of Nature which will have her way and her
play in her great field of mind and life and body; what is dangerous in her, is
the power of her three \s{gu\,nas}, modes or qualities to confuse and bewilder
the intelligence and so obscure the soul. That, as we shall see later, is the
whole crux of action and liberation for the Gita. Be free from obscuration and
bewilderment by the three \s{gu\,nas} and action can continue, as it must
continue, and even the largest, richest or most enormous and violent action; it
does not matter, for nothing then touches the Purusha, the soul has
\s{nai\,skarmya.}
\par But at present the Gita does not proceed to that larger point. Since the
mind is the instrumental cause, since inaction is impossible, what is rational,
necessary, the right way is a controlled action of the subjective and objective
organism. The mind must bring the senses under its control as an instrument
of the intelligent will and then the organs of action must be used for their
proper office, for action, but for action done as Yoga. But what is the
essence of this self-control, what is meant by action done as Yoga,
\s{Karmayoga}? It is non-attachment, it is to do works without clinging with
the mind to the objects of sense and the fruit of the works. Not complete
inaction, which is an error, a confusion, a self-delusion, an impossibility, but
action full and
Page 108

free done without subjection to sense and passion, desireless and unattached
works, are the first secret of perfection. Do action thus self-controlled, says
Krishna, \s{niyata\.m kuru karma tvam}: I have said that knowledge, the
intelligence, is greater than works, \s{jy\=ayas\=i karma\,no buddhi\,h}, but I did not
mean that inaction is greater than action; the contrary is the truth, \s{karma
jy\=ayo} \s{akarma\,na\,h}. For knowledge does not mean renunciation of works,
it means equality and non-attachment to desire and the objects of sense; and
it means the poise of the intelligent will in the Soul free and high-uplifted
above the lower instrumentation of Prakriti and controlling the works of the
mind and the senses and body in the power of self-knowledge and the pure
objectless self-delight of spiritual realisation, \s{niyata\.m karma}.
\note{Again, I cannot accept the current interpretation of \s{niyata\.m karma}
as if it meant fixed and formal works and were equivalent to the Vedic
\s{nityakarma}, the regular works of sacrifice, ceremonial and the daily rule
of Vedic living. Surely, \s{niyata} simply takes up the \s{niyamya} of the last
verse. Krishna makes a statement, “he who controlling the senses by the
mind engages with the organs of action in Yoga of action, he excels,”
\s{manas\=a niyamya \=arabhate karmayogam}, and he immediately goes on to
draw from the statement an injunction, to sum it up and convert it into a rule.
“Do thou do controlled action,” \s{niyata\.m kuru karma tvam}: \s{niyatam}
takes up the \s{niyamya}, \s{kuru karma} takes up the \s{\=arabhate
karmayogam}. Not formal works fixed by an external rule, but desireless
works controlled by the liberated \s{buddhi}, is the Gita's teaching.}
\s{Buddhiyoga} is fulfilled by \s{karmayoga}; the Yoga of the self-liberating
intelligent will finds its full meaning by the Yoga of desireless works. Thus
the Gita founds its teaching of the necessity of desireless works, \s{ni\,sk\=ama
karma}, and unites the subjective practice of the Sankhyas—rejecting their
merely physical rule—with the practice of Yoga.
\par But still there is an essential difficulty unsolved. Desire is the ordinary
motive of all human actions, and if the soul is free from desire, then there is
no farther rationale for action. We may be compelled to do certain works for
the maintenance of the body, but even that is a subjection to the desire of the
body which we ought to get rid of if we are to attain perfection. But granting
that this cannot be done, the only way is to fix a rule for action outside
ourselves, not dictated by anything in our subjectivity, the \s{nityakarma} of
the Vedic rule, the routine
Page 109

of ceremonial sacrifice, daily conduct and social duty, which the man who
seeks liberation may do simply because it is enjoined upon him, without any
personal purpose or subjective interest in them, with an absolute indifference
to the doing, not because he is compelled by his nature but because it is
enjoined by the Shastra. But if the principle of the action is not to be external
to the nature but subjective, if the actions even of the liberated and the sage
are to be controlled and determined by his nature, \s{svabh\=ava-niyatam},
then the only subjective principle of action is desire of whatever kind, lust of
the flesh or emotion of the heart or base or noble aim of the mind, but all
subject to the \s{gu\,nas} of Prakriti. Let us then interpret the \s{niyata
karma} of the Gita as the \s{nityakarma} of the Vedic rule, its \s{kartavya
karma} or work that has to be done as the Aryan rule of social duty and let
us take too its work done as a sacrifice to mean simply these Vedic
sacrifices and this fixed social duty performed disinterestedly and without any
personal object. This is how the Gita's doctrine of desireless work is often
interpreted. But it seems to me that the Gita's teaching is not so crude and
simple, not so local and temporal and narrow as all that. It is large, free,
subtle and profound; it is for all time and for all men, not for a particular age
and country. Especially, it is always breaking free from external forms,
details, dogmatic notions and going back to principles and the great facts of
our nature and our being. It is a work of large philosophic truth and spiritual
practicality, not of constrained religious and philosophical formulas and
stereotyped dogmas.
\par The difficulty is this, how, our nature being what it is and desire the
common principle of its action, is it possible to institute a really desireless
action? For what we call ordinarily disinterested action is not really
desireless; it is simply a replacement of certain smaller personal interests by
other larger desires which have only the appearance of being impersonal,
virtue, country, mankind. All action, moreover, as Krishna insists, is done by
the \s{gu\,nas} of Prakriti, by our nature; in acting according to the Shastra we
are still acting according to our nature,—even if this Shastric action is not, as
it usually is, a mere cover for our desires, prejudices, passions, egoisms, our
personal, national, sectarian
Page 110

vanities, sentiments and preferences; but even otherwise, even at the purest,
still we obey a choice of our nature, and if our nature were different and the
\s{gu\,nas} acted on our intelligence and will in some other combination, we
would not accept the Shastra, but live according to our pleasure or our
intellectual notions or else break free from the social law to live the life of the
solitary or the ascetic. We cannot become impersonal by obeying something
outside ourselves, for we cannot so get outside ourselves; we can only do it
by rising to the highest in ourselves, into our free Soul and Self which is the
same and one in all and has therefore no personal interests, to the Divine in
our being who possesses Himself transcendent of cosmos and is therefore
not bound by His cosmic works or His individual action. That is what the Gita
teaches and desirelessness is only a means to this end, not an aim in itself.
Yes, but how is it to be brought about? By doing all works with sacrifice as
the only object, is the reply of the divine Teacher. “By doing works otherwise
than for sacrifice, this world of men is in bondage to works; for sacrifice
practise works, O son of Kunti, becoming free from all attachment.” It is
evident that all works and not merely sacrifice and social duties can be done
in this spirit; any action may be done either from the ego-sense narrow or
enlarged or for the sake of the Divine. All being and all action of Prakriti
exist only for the sake of the Divine; from that it proceeds, by that it endures,
to that it is directed. But so long as we are dominated by the ego-sense we
cannot perceive or act in the spirit of this truth, but act for the satisfaction of
the ego and in the spirit of the ego, otherwise than for sacrifice. Egoism is the
knot of the bondage. By acting Godwards, without any thought of ego, we
loosen this knot and finally arrive at freedom.
\par At first, however, the Gita takes up the Vedic statement of the idea of
sacrifice and phrases the law of sacrifice in its current terms. This it does
with a definite object. We have seen that the quarrel between renunciation
and works has two forms, the opposition of Sankhya and Yoga which is
already in principle reconciled and the opposition of Vedism and Vedantism
which the Teacher has yet to reconcile. The first is a larger statement of
Page 111

the opposition in which the idea of works is general and wide. The Sankhya
starts from the notion of the divine status as that of the immutable and
inactive Purusha which each soul is in reality and makes an opposition
between inactivity of Purusha and activity of Prakriti; so its logical
culmination is cessation of all works. Yoga starts from the notion of the
Divine as Ishwara, lord of the operations of Prakriti and therefore superior to
them, and its logical culmination is not cessation of works but the soul's
superiority to them and freedom even though doing all works. In the
opposition of Vedism and Vedantism works, \s{karma}, are restricted to
Vedic works and sometimes even to Vedic sacrifice and ritualised works, all
else being excluded as not useful to salvation. Vedism of the Mimansakas
insisted on them as the means, Vedantism taking its stand on the Upanishads
looked on them as only a preliminary belonging to the state of ignorance and
in the end to be overpassed and rejected, an obstacle to the seeker of
liberation. Vedism worshipped the Devas, the gods, with sacrifice and held
them to be the powers who assist our salvation. Vedantism was inclined to
regard them as powers of the mental and material world opposed to our
salvation (men, says the Upanishad, are the cattle of the gods, who do not
desire man to know and be free); it saw the Divine as the immutable
Brahman who has to be attained not by works of sacrifice and worship but
by knowledge. Works only lead to material results and to an inferior
Paradise; therefore they have to be renounced.
\par The Gita resolves this opposition by insisting that the Devas are only
forms of the one Deva, the Ishwara, the Lord of all Yoga and worship and
sacrifice and austerity, and if it is true that sacrifice offered to the Devas
leads only to material results and to Paradise, it is also true that sacrifice
offered to the Ishwara leads beyond them to the great liberation. For the
Lord and the immutable Brahman are not two different beings, but one and
the same Being, and whoever strives towards either, is striving towards that
one divine Existence. All works in their totality find their culmination and
completeness in the knowledge of the Divine, \s{sarva\.m karm\=akhila\.m p\=artha
j\~n\=ane parisam\=apyate}. They are not an obstacle, but the way to the supreme
knowledge.
Page 112

Thus this opposition too is reconciled with the help of a large elucidation of
the meaning of sacrifice. In fact its conflict is only a restricted form of the
larger opposition between Yoga and Sankhya. Vedism is a specialised and
narrow form of Yoga; the principle of the Vedantists is identical with that of
the Sankhyas, for to both the movement of salvation is the recoil of the
intelligence, the \s{buddhi}, from the differentiating powers of Nature, from
ego, mind, senses, from the subjective and the objective, and its return to the
undifferentiated and the immutable. It is with this object of reconciliation in
his mind that the Teacher first approaches his statement of the doctrine of
sacrifice; but throughout, even from the very beginning, he keeps his eye not
on the restricted Vedic sense of sacrifice and works, but on their larger and
universal application,—that widening of narrow and formal notions to admit
the great general truths they unduly restrict which is always the method of
the Gita.
Page 113

\par
\HN XII
\par
\ht The Significance of Sacrifice
\par\drop The Gita's theory of sacrifice is stated in two separate passages;
one we find in the third chapter, another in the fourth; the first gives it in
language which might, taken by itself, seem to be speaking only of the
ceremonial sacrifice; the second interpreting that into the sense of a large
philosophical symbolism, transforms at once its whole significance and raises
it to a plane of high psychological and spiritual truth. “With sacrifice the Lord
of creatures of old created creatures and said, By this shall you bring forth
(fruits or offspring), let this be your milker of desires. Foster by this the gods
and let the gods foster you; fostering each other, you shall attain to the
supreme good. Fostered by sacrifice the gods shall give you desired
enjoyments; who enjoys their given enjoyments and has not given to them, he
is a thief. The good who eat what is left from the sacrifice, are released from
all sin; but evil are they and enjoy sin who cook (the food) for their own sake.
From food creatures come into being, from rain is the birth of food, from
sacrifice comes into being the rain, sacrifice is born of work; work know to
be born of Brahman, Brahman is born of the Immutable; therefore is the
all-pervading Brahman established in the sacrifice. He who follows not here
the wheel thus set in movement, evil is his being, sensual is his delight, in vain,
O Partha, that man lives.” Having thus stated the necessity of sacrifice,—we
shall see hereafter in what sense we may understand a passage which seems
at first sight to convey only a traditional theory of ritualism and the necessity
of the ceremonial offering,—Krishna proceeds to state the superiority of the
spiritual man to works. “But the man whose delight is in the Self and who is
satisfied with the enjoyment of the Self and in the Self he is content, for him
there exists no work that needs to be done. He has no object here to be
gained by action done and none to be gained by action undone;
Page 114

he has no dependence on all these existences for any object to be gained.”
\par Here then are the two ideals, Vedist and Vedantist, standing as if in all
their sharp original separation and opposition, on one side the active ideal of
acquiring enjoyments here and the highest good beyond by sacrifice and the
mutual dependence of the human being and the divine powers and on the
other, facing it, the austerer ideal of the liberated man who, independent in
the Spirit, has nothing to do with enjoyment or works or the human or the
divine worlds, but exists only in the peace of the supreme Self, joys only in
the calm joy of the Brahman. The next verses create a ground for the
reconciliation between the two extremes; the secret is not inaction as soon as
one turns towards the higher truth, but desireless action both before and after
it is reached. The liberated man has nothing to gain by action, but nothing also
to gain by inaction, and it is not at all for any personal object that he has to
make his choice. “Therefore without attachment perform ever the work that
is to be done (done for the sake of the world, \s{lokasa\.ngraha}, as is made
clear immediately afterward); for by doing work without attachment man
attains to the highest. For it was even by works that Janaka and the rest
attained to perfection.” It is true that works and sacrifice are a means of
arriving at the highest good, \s{\'sreya\,h param av\=apsyatha}; but there are
three kinds of works, that done without sacrifice for personal enjoyment
which is entirely selfish and egoistic and misses the true law and aim and
utility of life, \s{mogha\.m p\=artha sa j\=ivati}, that done with desire, but with
sacrifice and the enjoyment only as a result of sacrifice and therefore to that
extent consecrated and sanctified, and that done without desire or attachment
of any kind. It is the last which brings the soul of man to the highest,
\s{param \=apnoti p\=uru\,sa\,h}.
\par The whole sense and drift of this teaching turns upon the interpretation
we are to give to the important words, \s{yaj\~na}, \s{karma}, \s{brahma},
sacrifice, work, Brahman. If the sacrifice is simply the Vedic sacrifice, if the
work from which it is born is the Vedic rule of works and if the \s{brahman}
from which the work itself is born is the \s{\'sabdabrahman} in the sense only
of the
Page 115

letter of the Veda, then all the positions of the Vedist dogma are conceded
and there is nothing more. Ceremonial sacrifice is the right means of gaining
children, wealth, enjoyment; by ceremonial sacrifice rain is brought down
from heaven and the prosperity and continuity of the race assured; life is a
continual transaction between the gods and men in which man offers
ceremonial gifts to the gods from the gifts they have bestowed on him and in
return is enriched, protected, fostered. Therefore all human works have to be
accompanied and turned into a sacrament by ceremonial sacrifice and
ritualistic worship; work not so dedicated is accursed, enjoyment without
previous ceremonial sacrifice and ritual consecration is a sin. Even salvation,
even the highest good is to be gained by ceremonial sacrifice. It must never
be abandoned. Even the seeker of liberation has to continue to do ceremonial
sacrifice, although without attachment; it is by ceremonial sacrifice and
ritualistic works done without attachment that men of the type of Janaka
attained to spiritual perfection and liberation.
\par Obviously, this cannot be the meaning of the Gita, for it would be in
contradiction with all the rest of the book. Even in the passage itself, without
the illumining interpretation afterwards given to it in the fourth chapter, we
have already an indication of a wider sense where it is said that sacrifice is
born from work, work from \s{brahman}, \s{brahman} from the Akshara,
and therefore the all-pervading Brahman, \s{sarvagata\.m brahma}, is
established in the sacrifice. The connecting logic of the “therefore” and the
repetition of the word \s{brahma} are significant; for it shows clearly that the
\s{brahman} from which all work is born has to be understood with an eye
not so much to the current Vedic teaching in which it means the Veda as to a
symbolical sense in which the creative Word is identical with the
all-pervading Brahman, the Eternal, the one Self present in all existences,
\s{sarvabh\=ute\,su}, and present in all the workings of existence. The Veda is
the knowledge of the Divine, the Eternal,—“I am He who is to be known in
all the books of the Knowledge,” \s{vedai\'s ca vedya\,h}, Krishna will say in a
subsequent chapter; but it is the knowledge of him in the workings of Prakriti,
in the workings of the three
Page 116

\s{gu\,nas}, first qualities or modes of Nature, \s{traigu\,nyavi\,say\=a ved\=a\,h}. This
Brahman or Divine in the workings of Nature is born, as we may say, out of
the Akshara, the immutable Purusha, the Self who stands above all the
modes or qualities or workings of Nature, \s{nistraigu\,nya}. The Brahman is
one but self-displayed in two aspects, the immutable Being and the creator
and originator of works in the mutable becoming, \s{\=atman},
\s{sarvabh\=ut\=ani}; it is the immobile omnipresent Soul of things and it is the
spiritual principle of the mobile working of things, Purusha poised in himself
and Purusha active in Prakriti; it is \s{ak\,sara} and \s{k\,sara}. In both of these
aspects the Divine Being, Purushottama, manifests himself in the universe;
the immutable above all qualities is His poise of peace, self-possession,
equality, \s{sama\.m brahma}; from that proceeds His manifestation in the
qualities of Prakriti and their universal workings; from the Purusha in Prakriti,
from this Brahman with qualities, proceed all the works
\note{That this is the right interpretation results also from the opening of the
eighth chapter where the universal principles are enumerated, \s{ak\,sara
(brahma)}, \s{svabh\=ava}, \s{karma}, \s{k\,sara bh\=ava}, \s{puru\,sa},
\s{adhiyaj\~na}. Akshara is the immutable Brahman, spirit or self, Atman;
swabhava is the principle of the self, \s{adhy\=atma}, operative as the original
nature of the being, “own way of becoming”, and this proceeds out of the
self, the Akshara; Karma proceeds from that and is the creative movement,
\s{visarga}, which brings all natural beings and all changing subjective and
objective shapes of being into existence; the result of Karma therefore is all
this mutable becoming, the changes of nature developed out of the original
self-nature, \s{k\,sara bh\=ava} out of \s{svabh\=ava}; Purusha is the soul, the
divine element in the becoming, \s{adhidaivata}, by whose presence the
workings of Karma become a sacrifice, \s{yaj\~na}, to the Divine within;
\s{adhiyaj\~na} is this secret Divine who receives the sacrifice.} of the
universal energy, Karma, in man and in all existences; from that work
proceeds the principle of sacrifice. Even the material interchange between
gods and men proceeds upon this principle, as typified in the dependence of
rain and its product food on this working and on them the physical birth of
creatures. For all the working of Prakriti is in its true nature a sacrifice,
\s{yaj\~na}, with the Divine Being as the enjoyer of all energisms and works
and sacrifice and the great Lord of all existences, \s{bhokt\=ara\.m
yaj\~natapas\=a\.m} \s{sarvaloka}\s{-mahe\'svaram}, and to know this Divine
all-pervading and established in sacrifice, \s{sarvagata\.m yaj\~ne prati\,s\,thitam},
is the true, the Vedic knowledge.
Page 117

\par But he may be known in an inferior action through the {\it devas}, the
gods, the powers of the divine Soul in Nature and in the eternal interaction of
these powers and the soul of man, mutually giving and receiving, mutually
helping, increasing, raising each other's workings and satisfaction, a
commerce in which man rises towards a growing fitness for the supreme
good. He recognises that his life is a part of this divine action in Nature and
not a thing separate and to be held and pursued for its own sake. He regards
his enjoyments and the satisfaction of his desires as the fruit of sacrifice and
the gift of the gods in their divine universal workings and he ceases to pursue
them in the false and evil spirit of sinful egoistic selfishness as if they were a
good to be seized from life by his own unaided strength without return and
without thankfulness. As this spirit increases in him, he subordinates his
desires, becomes satisfied with sacrifice as the law of life and works and is
content with whatever remains over from the sacrifice, giving up all the rest
freely as an offering in the great and beneficent interchange between his life
and the world-life. Whoever goes contrary to this law of action and pursues
works and enjoyment for his own isolated personal self-interest, lives in vain;
he misses the true meaning and aim and utility of living and the upward
growth of the soul; he is not on the path which leads to the highest good. But
the highest only comes when the sacrifice is no longer to the gods, but to the
one all-pervading Divine established in the sacrifice, of whom the gods are
inferior forms and powers, and when he puts away the lower self that desires
and enjoys and gives up his personal sense of being the worker to the true
executrix of all works, Prakriti, and his personal sense of being the enjoyer to
the Divine Purusha, the higher and universal Self who is the real enjoyer of
the works of Prakriti. In that Self and not in any personal enjoyment he finds
now his sole satisfaction, complete content, pure delight; he has nothing to
gain by action or inaction, depends neither on gods nor men for anything,
seeks no profit from any, for the self-delight is all-sufficient to him, but does
works for the sake of the Divine only, as a pure sacrifice, without attachment
or desire. Thus he gains equality and becomes free from the
Page 118

modes of Nature, \s{nistraigu\,nya}; his soul takes its poise not in the
insecurity of Prakriti, but in the peace of the immutable Brahman, even while
his actions continue in the movement of Prakriti. Thus is sacrifice his way of
attaining to the Highest.
\par That this is the sense of the passage is made clear in what follows, by
the affirmation of \s{lokasa\.ngraha} as the object of works, of Prakriti as the
sole doer of works and the divine Purusha as their equal upholder, to whom
works have to be given up even in their doing,—this inner giving up of works
and yet physical doing of them is the culmination of sacrifice,—and by the
affirmation that the result of such active sacrifice with an equal and
desireless mind is liberation from the bondage of works. “He who is satisfied
with whatever gain comes to him and equal in failure and success, is not
bound even when he acts. When a man liberated, free from attachment, acts
for sacrifice, all his action is dissolved,” leaves, that is to say, no result of
bondage or after-impression on his free, pure, perfect and equal soul. To
these passages we shall have to return. They are followed by a perfectly
explicit and detailed interpretation of the meaning of \s{yaj\~na} in the language
of the Gita which leaves no doubt at all about the symbolic use of the words
and the psychological character of the sacrifice enjoined by this teaching. In
the ancient Vedic system there was always a double sense physical and
psychological, outward and symbolic, the exterior form of the sacrifice and
the inner meaning of all its circumstances. But the secret symbolism of the
ancient Vedic mystics, exact, curious, poetic, psychological, had been long
forgotten by this time and it is now replaced by another, large, general and
philosophical in the spirit of Vedanta and a later Yoga. The fire of sacrifice,
\s{agni}, is no material flame, but \s{brahm\=agni}, the fire of the Brahman, or
it is the Brahman-ward energy, inner Agni, priest of the sacrifice, into which
the offering is poured; the fire is self-control or it is a purified sense-action or
it is the vital energy in that discipline of the control of the vital being through
the control of the breath which is common to Rajayoga and Hathayoga, or it
is the fire of self-knowledge, the flame of the supreme sacrifice. The food
eaten as the leavings of the sacrifice is, it is explained, the nectar
Page 119

of immortality, \s{am\,rta}, left over from the offering; and here we have still
something of the old Vedic symbolism in which the Soma-wine was the
physical symbol of the \s{am\,rta}, the immortalising delight of the divine
ecstasy won by the sacrifice, offered to the gods and drunk by men. The
offering itself is whatever working of his energy, physical or psychological, is
consecrated by him in action of body or action of mind to the gods or God, to
the Self or to the universal powers, to one's own higher Self or to the Self in
mankind and in all existences.
\par This elaborate explanation of the Yajna sets out with a vast and
comprehensive definition in which it is declared that the act and energy and
materials of the sacrifice, the giver and receiver of the sacrifice, the goal and
object of the sacrifice are all the one Brahman. “Brahman is the giving,
Brahman is the food-offering, by Brahman it is offered into the Brahman-fire,
Brahman is that which is to be attained by samadhi in Brahman-action.” This
then is the knowledge in which the liberated man has to do works of
sacrifice. It is the knowledge declared of old in the great Vedantic
utterances, “I am He”, “All this verily is the Brahman, Brahman is this Self.”
It is the knowledge of the entire unity; it is the One manifest as the doer and
the deed and the object of works, knower and knowledge and the object of
knowledge. The universal energy into which the action is poured is the
Divine; the consecrated energy of the giving is the Divine; whatever is
offered is only some form of the Divine; the giver of the offering is the
Divine himself in man; the action, the work, the sacrifice is itself the Divine in
movement, in activity; the goal to be reached by sacrifice is the Divine. For
the man who has this knowledge and lives and acts in it, there can be no
binding works, no personal and egoistically appropriated action; there is only
the divine Purusha acting by the divine Prakriti in His own being, offering
everything into the fire of His self-conscious cosmic energy, while the
knowledge and the possession of His divine existence and consciousness by
the soul unified with Him is the goal of all this God-directed movement and
activity. To know that and to live and act in this unifying consciousness is to
be free.
Page 120

\par But all even of the Yogins have not attained to this knowledge. “Some
Yogins follow after the sacrifice which is of the gods; others offer the
sacrifice by the sacrifice itself into the Brahman-fire.” The former conceive
of the Divine in various forms and powers and seek him by various means,
ordinances, \s{dharmas}, laws or, as we might say, settled rites of action,
self-discipline, consecrated works; for the latter, those who already know, the
simple fact of sacrifice, of offering whatever work to the Divine itself, of
casting all their activities into the unified divine consciousness and energy, is
their one means, their one \s{dharma}. The means of sacrifice are various;
the offerings are of many kinds. There is the psychological sacrifice of
self-control and self-discipline which leads to the higher self-possession and
self-knowledge. “Some offer their senses into the fires of control, others
offer the objects of sense into the fires of sense, and others offer all the
actions of the sense and all the actions of the vital force into the fire of the
Yoga of self-control kindled by knowledge.” There is, that is to say, the
discipline which receives the objects of sense-perception without allowing the
mind to be disturbed or affected by its sense-activities, the senses themselves
becoming pure fires of sacrifice; there is the discipline which stills the senses
so that the soul in its purity may appear from behind the veil of mind-action,
calm and still; there is the discipline by which, when the self is known, all the
actions of the sense-perceptions and all the action of the vital being are
received into that one still and tranquil soul. The offering of the striver after
perfection may be material and physical, \s{dravya-yaj\~na}, like that
consecrated in worship by the devotee to his deity, or it may be the austerity
of his self-discipline and energy of his soul directed to some high aim,
\s{tapo-yaj\~na}, or it may be some form of Yoga like the Pranayama of the
Rajayogins and Hathayogins, or any other \s{yoga-yaj\~na}. All these tend to
the purification of the being; all sacrifice is a way towards the attainment of
the highest.
\par The one thing needful, the saving principle constant in all these
variations, is to subordinate the lower activities, to diminish the control of
desire and replace it by a superior energy, to abandon the purely egoistic
enjoyment for that diviner delight
Page 121

which comes by sacrifice, by self-dedication, by self-mastery, by the giving
up of one's lower impulses to a greater and higher aim. “They who enjoy the
nectar of immortality left over from the sacrifice attain to the eternal
Brahman.” Sacrifice is the law of the world and nothing can be gained
without it, neither mastery here, nor the possession of heavens beyond, nor
the supreme possession of all; “this world is not for him who doeth not
sacrifice, how then any other world?” Therefore all these and many other
forms of sacrifice have been “extended in the mouth of the Brahman,” the
mouth of that Fire which receives all offerings; they are all means and forms
of the one great Existence in activity, means by which the action of the
human being can be offered up to That of which his outward existence is a
part and with which his inmost self is one. They are “all born of work”; all
proceed from and are ordained by the one vast energy of the Divine which
manifests itself in the universal \s{karma} and makes all the cosmic activity a
progressive offering to the one Self and Lord and of which the last stage for
the human being is self-knowledge and the possession of the divine or
Brahmic consciousness. “So knowing thou shalt become free.”
\par But there are gradations in the range of these various forms of sacrifice,
the physical offering the lowest, the sacrifice of knowledge the highest.
Knowledge is that in which all this action culminates, not any lower
knowledge, but the highest, self-knowledge and God-knowledge, that which
we can learn from those who know the true principles of existence, that by
possessing which we shall not fall again into the bewilderment of the mind's
ignorance and into its bondage to mere sense-knowledge and to the inferior
activity of the desires and passions. The knowledge in which all culminates is
that by which “thou shalt see all existences (becomings, \s{bh\=ut\=ani}) without
exception in the Self, then in Me.” For the Self is that one, immutable,
all-pervading, all-containing, self-existent reality or Brahman hidden behind
our mental being into which our consciousness widens out when it is liberated
from the ego; we come to see all beings as becomings, \s{bh\=ut\=ani}, within
that one self-existence.
\par But this Self or immutable Brahman we see too to be the
Page 122

self-presentation to our essential psychological consciousness of a supreme
Being who is the source of our existence and of whom all that is mutable or
immutable is the manifestation. He is God, the Divine, the Purushottama. To
Him we offer everything as a sacrifice; into His hands we give up our
actions; in His existence we live and move; unified with Him in our nature
and with all existence in Him, we become one soul and one power of being
with Him and with all beings; with His supreme reality we identify and unite
our self-being. By works done for sacrifice, eliminating desire, we arrive at
knowledge and at the soul's possession of itself; by works done in
self-knowledge and God-knowledge we are liberated into the unity, peace
and joy of the divine existence.
Page 123

\par
\HN XIII
\par
\ht The Lord of the Sacrifice
\par\drop We have, before we can proceed further, to gather up all that has
been said in its main principles. The whole of the Gita's gospel of works rests
upon its idea of sacrifice and contains in fact the eternal connecting truth of
God and the world and works. The human mind seizes ordinarily only
fragmentary notions and standpoints of a many-sided eternal truth of
existence and builds upon them its various theories of life and ethics and
religion, stressing this or that sign or appearance, but to some entirety of it it
must always tend to reawaken whenever it returns in an age of large
enlightenment to any entire and synthetic relation of its world-knowledge with
its God-knowledge and self-knowledge. The gospel of the Gita reposes upon
this fundamental Vedantic truth that all being is the one Brahman and all
existence the wheel of Brahman, a divine movement opening out from God
and returning to God. All is the expressive activity of Nature and Nature a
power of the Divine which works out the consciousness and will of the divine
Soul master of her works and inhabitant of her forms. It is for his satisfaction
that she descends into the absorption of the forms of things and the works of
life and mind and returns again through mind and self-knowledge to the
conscious possession of the Soul that dwells within her. There is first an
involving of self and all it is or means in an evolution of phenomena; there is
afterwards an evolution of self, a revelation of all it is and means, all that is
hidden and yet suggested by the phenomenal creation. This cycle of Nature
could not be what it is but for the Purusha assuming and maintaining
simultaneously three eternal poises each of which is necessary to the totality
of this action. It must manifest itself in the mutable, and there we see it as the
finite, the many, all existences, \s{sarvabh\=ut\=ani}. It appears to us as the finite
personality of these million creatures with their
Page 124

infinite diversities and various relations and it appears to us behind these as
the soul and force of the action of the gods,—that is to say, the cosmic
powers and qualities of the Divine which preside over the workings of the life
of the universe and constitute to our perception different universal forms of
the one Existence, or, it may be, various self-statements of personality of the
one supreme Person. Then, secret behind and within all forms and
existences, we perceive too an immutable, an infinite, a timeless, an
impersonal, a one unchanging spirit of existence, an indivisible Self of all that
is, in which all these many find themselves to be really one. And therefore by
returning to that the active, finite personality of the individual being discovers
that it can release itself into a silent largeness of universality and the peace
and poise of an immutable and unattached unity with all that proceeds from
and is supported by this indivisible Infinite. Or even he may escape into it
from individual existence. But the highest secret of all, \s{uttama\.m
rahasyam}, is the Purushottama. This is the supreme Divine, God, who
possesses both the infinite and the finite and in whom the personal and the
impersonal, the one Self and the many existences, being and becoming, the
world-action and the supracosmic peace, \s{prav\,rtti} and \s{niv\,rtti}, meet,
are united, are possessed together and in each other. In God all things find
their secret truth and their absolute reconciliation.
\par All truth of works must depend upon the truth of being. All active
existence must be in its inmost reality a sacrifice of works offered by Prakriti
to Purusha, Nature offering to the supreme and infinite Soul the desire of the
multiple finite Soul within her. Life is an altar to which she brings her
workings and the fruits of her workings and lays them before whatever
aspect of the Divinity the consciousness in her has reached for whatever
result of the sacrifice the desire of the living soul can seize on as its
immediate or its highest good. According to the grade of consciousness and
being which the soul has reached in Nature, will be the Divinity it worships,
the delight which it seeks and the hope for which it sacrifices. And in the
movement of the mutable Purusha in Nature all is and must be interchange;
for
Page 125

existence is one and its divisions must found themselves on some law of
mutual dependence, each growing by each and living by all. Where sacrifice
is not willingly given, Nature exacts it by force, she satisfies the law of her
living. A mutual giving and receiving is the law of Life without which it
cannot for one moment endure, and this fact is the stamp of the divine
creative Will on the world it has manifested in its being, the proof that with
sacrifice as their eternal companion the Lord of creatures has created all
these existences. The universal law of sacrifice is the sign that the world is of
God and belongs to God and that life is his dominion and house of worship
and not a field for the self-satisfaction of the independent ego; not the
fulfilment of the ego,—that is only our crude and obscure beginning,—but the
discovery of God, the worship and seeking of the Divine and the Infinite
through a constantly enlarging sacrifice culminating in a perfect self-giving
founded on a perfect self-knowledge, is that to which the experience of life is
at last intended to lead.
\par But the individual being begins with ignorance and persists long in
ignorance. Acutely conscious of himself he sees the ego as the cause and
whole meaning of life and not the Divine. He sees himself as the doer of
works and does not see that all the workings of existence including his own
internal and external activities are the workings of one universal Nature and
nothing else. He sees himself as the enjoyer of works and imagines that for
him all exists and him Nature ought to satisfy and obey his personal will; he
does not see that she is not at all concerned with satisfying him or at all
careful of his will, but obeys a higher universal will and seeks to satisfy a
Godhead who transcends her and her works and creations; his finite being,
his will and his satisfactions are hers and not his, and she offers them at
every moment as a sacrifice to the Divine of whose purpose in her she
makes all this the covert instrumentation. Because of this ignorance whose
seal is egoism, the creature ignores the law of sacrifice and seeks to take all
he can for himself and gives only what Nature by her internal and external
compulsion forces him to give. He can really take nothing except what she
allows him to receive as his portion, what the divine Powers within her yield
Page 126

to his desire. The egoistic soul in a world of sacrifice is as if a thief or robber
who takes what these Powers bring to him and has no mind to give in return.
He misses the true meaning of life and, since he does not use life and works
for the enlargement and elevation of his being through sacrifice, he lives in
vain.
\par Only when the individual being begins to perceive and acknowledge in
his acts the value of the self in others as well as the power and needs of his
own ego, begins to perceive universal Nature behind his own workings and
through the cosmic godheads gets some glimpse of the One and the Infinite,
is he on his way to the transcendence of his limitation by the ego and the
discovery of his soul. He begins to discover a law other than that of his
desires, to which his desires must be more and more subordinated and
subjected; he develops the purely egoistic into the understanding and ethical
being. He begins to give more value to the claims of the self in others and
less to the claims of his ego; he admits the strife between egoism and
altruism and by the increase of his altruistic tendencies he prepares the
enlargement of his own consciousness and being. He begins to perceive
Nature and divine Powers in Nature to whom he owes sacrifice, adoration,
obedience, because it is by them and by their law that the workings both of
the mental and the material world are controlled, and he learns that only by
increasing their presence and their greatness in his thought and will and life
can he himself increase his powers, knowledge, right action and the
satisfactions which these things bring to him. Thus he adds the religious and
supraphysical to the material and egoistic sense of life and prepares himself
to rise through the finite to the Infinite.
\par But this is only a long intermediate stage. It is still subject to the law of
desire, to the centrality of all things in the conceptions and needs of his ego
and to the control of his being as well as his works by Nature, though it is a
regulated and governed desire, a clarified ego and a Nature more and more
subtilised and enlightened by the sattwic, the highest natural principle. All this
is still within the domain, though the very much enlarged domain, of the
mutable, finite and personal. The real self-knowledge and consequently the
right way of works
Page 127

lies beyond; for the sacrifice done with knowledge is the highest sacrifice and
that alone brings a perfect working. That can only come when he perceives
that the self in him and the self in others are one being and this self is
something higher than the ego, an infinite, an impersonal, a universal
existence in whom all move and have their being,—when he perceives that
all the cosmic gods to whom he offers his sacrifice are forms of one infinite
Godhead and when again, leaving all his limited and limiting conceptions of
that one Godhead, he perceives him to be the supreme and ineffable Deity
who is at once the finite and the infinite, the one self and the many, beyond
Nature though manifesting himself through Nature, beyond limitation by
qualities though formulating the power of his being through infinite quality.
This is the Purushottama to whom the sacrifice has to be offered, not for any
transient personal fruit of works, but for the soul's possession of God and in
order to live in harmony and union with the Divine.
\par In other words, man's way to liberation and perfection lies through an
increasing impersonality. It is his ancient and constant experience that the
more he opens himself to the impersonal and infinite, to that which is pure
and high and one and common in all things and beings, the impersonal and
infinite in Nature, the impersonal and infinite in life, the impersonal and infinite
in his own subjectivity, the less he is bound by his ego and by the circle of the
finite, the more he feels a sense of largeness, peace, pure happiness. The
pleasure, joy, satisfaction which the finite by itself can give or the ego in its
own right attain, is transitory, petty and insecure. To dwell entirely in the
ego-sense and its finite conceptions, powers, satisfactions is to find this world
for ever full of transience and suffering, \s{anityam asukham}; the finite life
is always troubled by a certain sense of vanity for this fundamental reason
that the finite is not the whole or the highest truth of life; life is not entirely
real until it opens into the sense of the infinite. It is for this reason that the
Gita opens its gospel of works by insisting on the Brahmic consciousness, the
impersonal life, that great object of the discipline of the ancient sages. For the
impersonal, the infinite, the One in which all
Page 128

the impermanent, mutable, multiple activity of the world finds above itself its
base of permanence, security and peace, is the immobile Self, the Akshara,
the Brahman. If we see this, we shall see that to raise one's consciousness
and the poise of one's being out of limited personality into this infinite and
impersonal Brahman is the first spiritual necessity. To see all beings in this
one Self is the knowledge which raises the soul out of egoistic ignorance and
its works and results; to live in it is to acquire peace and firm spiritual
foundation.
\par The way to bring about this great transformation follows a double path;
for there is the way of knowledge and there is the way of works, and the
Gita combines them in a firm synthesis. The way of knowledge is to turn the
understanding, the intelligent will away from its downward absorption in the
workings of the mind and the senses and upward to the self, the Purusha or
Brahman; it is to make it dwell always on the one idea of the one Self and not
in the many-branching conceptions of the mind and many-streaming impulses
of desire. Taken by itself this path would seem to lead to the complete
renunciation of works, to an immobile passivity and to the severance of the
soul from Nature. But in reality such an absolute renunciation, passivity and
severance are impossible. Purusha and Prakriti are twin principles of being
which cannot be severed, and so long as we remain in Nature, our workings
in Nature must continue, even though they may take a different form or
rather a different sense from those of the unenlightened soul. The real
renunciation—for renunciation, \s{sanny\=asa}, there must be—is not the
fleeing from works, but the slaying of ego and desire. The way is to abandon
attachment to the fruit of works even while doing them, and the way is to
recognise Nature as the agent and leave her to do her works and to live in
the soul as the witness and sustainer, watching and sustaining her, but not
attached either to her actions or their fruits. The ego, the limited and troubled
personality is then quieted and merged in the consciousness of the one
impersonal Self, while the works of Nature continue to our vision to operate
through all these “becomings” or existences who are now seen by us as living
Page 129

and acting and moving, under her impulsion entirely, in this one infinite Being;
our own finite existence is seen and felt to be only one of these and its
workings are seen and felt to be those of Nature, not of our real self which is
the silent, impersonal unity. The ego claimed them as its own doings and
therefore we thought them ours; but the ego is now dead and henceforth they
are no longer ours, but Nature's. We have achieved by the slaying of ego
impersonality in our being and consciousness; we have achieved by the
renunciation of desire impersonality in the works of our nature. We are free
not only in inaction, but in action; our liberty does not depend on a physical
and temperamental immobility and vacancy, nor do we fall from freedom
directly we act. Even in a full current of natural action the impersonal soul in
us remains calm, still and free.
\par The liberation given by this perfect impersonality is real, is complete, is
indispensable; but is it the last word, the end of the whole matter? All life, all
world-existence, we have said, is the sacrifice offered by Nature to the
Purusha, the one and secret soul in Nature, in whom all her workings take
place; but its real sense is obscured in us by ego, by desire, by our limited,
active, multiple personality. We have risen out of ego and desire and limited
personality and by impersonality, its great corrective, we have found the
impersonal Godhead; we have identified our being with the one self and soul
in whom all exist. The sacrifice of works continues, conducted not by
ourselves any longer, but by Nature,—Nature operating through the finite
part of our being, mind, senses, body,—but in our infinite being. But to whom
then is this sacrifice offered and with what object? For the impersonal has no
activity and no desires, no object to be gained, no dependence for anything on
all this world of creatures; it exists for itself, in its own self-delight, in its own
immutable eternal being. We may have to do works without desire as a
means in order to reach this impersonal self-existence and self-delight, but,
that movement once executed, the object of works is finished; the sacrifice is
no longer needed. Works may even then continue because Nature continues
and her activities; but there is no longer any further object in these works.
The sole reason
Page 130

for our continuing to act after liberation is purely negative; it is the compulsion
of Nature on our finite parts of mind and body. But if that be all, then, first,
works may well be whittled down and reduced to a minimum, may be
confined to what Nature's compulsion absolutely will have from our bodies;
and secondly, even if there is no reduction to a minimum,—since action does
not matter and inaction also is no object,—then the nature of the works also
does not matter. Arjuna, once having attained knowledge, may continue to
fight out the battle of Kurukshetra, following his old Kshatriya nature, or he
may leave it and live the life of the Sannyasin, following his new quietistic
impulse. Which of these things he does, becomes quite indifferent; or rather
the second is the better way, since it will discourage more quickly the
impulses of Nature which still have a hold on his mind owing to past created
tendency and, when his body has fallen from him, he will securely depart into
the Infinite and Impersonal with no necessity of returning again to the trouble
and madness of life in this transient and sorrowful world, \s{anityam asukham
ima\.m lokam.}
\par If this were so, the Gita would lose all its meaning; for its first and
central object would be defeated. But the Gita insists that the nature of the
action does matter and that there is a positive sanction for continuance in
works, not only that one quite negative and mechanical reason, the objectless
compulsion of Nature. There is still, after the ego has been conquered, a
divine Lord and enjoyer of the sacrifice, \s{bhokt\=ara\.m yaj\~natapas\=am}, and
there is still an object in the sacrifice. The impersonal Brahman is not the
very last word, not the utterly highest secret of our being; for impersonal and
personal, finite and infinite turn out to be only two opposite, yet concomitant
aspects of a divine Being unlimited by these distinctions who is both these
things at once. God is an ever unmanifest Infinite ever self-impelled to
manifest himself in the finite; he is the great impersonal Person of whom all
personalities are partial appearances; he is the Divine who reveals himself in
the human being, the Lord seated in the heart of man. Knowledge teaches us
to see all beings in the one impersonal self, for so we are liberated from the
separative
Page 131

ego-sense, and then through this delivering impersonality to see them in this
God, \s{\=atmani atho mayi}, “in the Self and then in Me.” Our ego, our limiting
personalities stand in the way of our recognising the Divine who is in all and
in whom all have their being; for, subject to personality, we see only such
fragmentary aspects of Him as the finite appearances of things suffer us to
seize. We have to arrive at him not through our lower personality, but through
the high, infinite and impersonal part of our being, and that we find by
becoming this self one in all in whose existence the whole world is
comprised. This infinite containing, not excluding all finite appearances, this
impersonal admitting, not rejecting all individualities and personalities, this
immobile sustaining, pervading, containing, not standing apart from all the
movement of Nature, is the clear mirror in which the Divine will reveal His
being. Therefore it is to the Impersonal that we have first to attain; through
the cosmic deities, through the aspects of the finite alone the perfect
knowledge of God cannot be totally obtained. But neither is the silent
immobility of the impersonal Self, conceived as shut into itself and divorced
from all that it sustains, contains and pervades, the whole all-revealing
all-satisfying truth of the Divine. To see that we have to look through its
silence to the Purushottama, and he in his divine greatness possesses both the
Akshara and the Kshara; he is seated in the immobility, but he manifests
himself in the movement and in all the action of cosmic Nature; to him even
after liberation the sacrifice of works in Nature continues to be offered.
\par The real goal of the Yoga is then a living and self-completing union with
the divine Purushottama and is not merely a self-extinguishing immergence in
the impersonal Being. To raise our whole existence to the Divine Being, to
dwell in him (\s{mayyeva nivasi\,syasi}), to be at one with him, unify our
consciousness with his, to make our fragmentary nature a reflection of his
perfect nature, to be inspired in our thought and sense wholly by the divine
knowledge, to be moved in will and action utterly and faultlessly by the divine
will, to lose desire in his love and delight, is man's perfection; it is that which
the Gita describes as
Page 132

the highest secret. It is the true goal and the last sense of human living and
the highest step in our progressive sacrifice of works. For he remains to the
end the master of works and the soul of sacrifice.
Page 133

\par
\HN XIV
\par
\ht The Principle of Divine Works
\par\drop This then is the sense of the Gita's doctrine of sacrifice. Its full
significance depends on the idea of the Purushottama which as yet is not
developed,—we find it set forth clearly only much later in the eighteen
chapters,—and therefore we have had to anticipate, at whatever cost of
infidelity to the progressive method of the Gita's exposition, that central
teaching. At present the Teacher simply gives a hint, merely adumbrates this
supreme presence of the Purushottama and his relation to the immobile Self
in whom it is our first business, our pressing spiritual need to find our poise of
perfect peace and equality by attainment to the Brahmic condition. He
speaks as yet not at all in set terms of the Purushottama, but of himself,—“I”,
Krishna, Narayana, the Avatar, the God in man who is also the Lord in the
universe incarnated in the figure of the divine charioteer of Kurukshetra. “In
the Self, then in Me,” is the formula he gives, implying that the transcendence
of the individual personality by seeing it as a “becoming” in the impersonal
self-existent Being is simply a means of arriving at that great secret
impersonal Personality, which is thus silent, calm and uplifted above Nature in
the impersonal Being, but also present and active in Nature in all these million
becomings. Losing our lower individual personality in the Impersonal, we
arrive finally at union with that supreme Personality which is not separate and
individual, but yet assumes all individualities. Transcending the lower nature
of the three gunas and seating the soul in the immobile Purusha beyond the
three gunas, we can ascend finally into the higher nature of the infinite
Godhead which is not bound by the three gunas even when it acts through
Nature. Reaching the inner actionlessness of the silent Purusha,
\s{nai\,skarmya}, and leaving Prakriti to do her works, we can attain
supremely beyond to the status of the divine Mastery which is
Page 134

able to do all works and yet be bound by none. The idea of the Purushottama,
seen here as the incarnate Narayana, Krishna, is therefore the key. Without
it the withdrawal from the lower nature to the Brahmic condition leads
necessarily to inaction of the liberated man, his indifference to the works of
the world; with it the same withdrawal becomes a step by which the works
of the world are taken up in the spirit, with the nature and in the freedom of
the Divine. See the silent Brahman as the goal and the world with all its
activities has to be forsaken; see God, the Divine, the Purushottama as the
goal, superior to action yet its inner spiritual cause and object and original will,
and the world with all its activities is conquered and possessed in a divine
transcendence of the world. It can become instead of a prison-house an
opulent kingdom, \s{r\=ajya\.m sam\,rddham}, which we have conquered for the
spiritual life by slaying the limitation of the tyrant ego and overcoming the
bondage of our gaoler desires and breaking the prison of our individualistic
possession and enjoyment. The liberated universalised soul becomes
\s{svar\=a\,t} \s{samr\=a\,t}, self-ruler and emperor.
\par The works of sacrifice are thus vindicated as a means of liberation and
absolute spiritual perfection, \s{sa\.msiddhi}. So Janaka and other great
Karmayogins of the mighty ancient Yoga attained to perfection, by equal and
desireless works done as a sacrifice, without the least egoistic aim or
attachment—\s{karma\,naiva hi sa\.msiddhim \=asthit\=a janak\=adaya\,h}. So too and
with the same desirelessness, after liberation and perfection, works can and
have to be continued by us in a large divine spirit, with the calm high nature
of a spiritual royalty. “Thou shouldst do works regarding also the holding
together of the peoples, \s{lokasa\.ngraham ev\=api sampa\'syan kartum arhasi}.
Whatsoever the Best doeth, that the lower kind of man puts into practice; the
standard he creates, the people follows. O son of Pritha, I have no work that
I need to do in all the three worlds, I have nothing that I have not gained and
have yet to gain, and I abide verily in
Page 135

the paths of action,” \s{varta eva ca karma\,ni},—\s{eva} implying, I abide in
it and do not leave it as the Sannyasin thinks himself bound to abandon
works. “For if I did not abide sleeplessly in the paths of action, men follow in
every way my path, these peoples would sink to destruction if I did not works
and I should be the creator of confusion and slay these creatures. As those
who know not act with attachment to the action, he who knows should act
without attachment, having for his motive to hold together the peoples. He
should not create a division of their understanding in the ignorant who are
attached to their works; he should set them to all actions, doing them himself
with knowledge and in Yoga.” There are few more important passages in the
Gita than these seven striking couplets.
\par But let us clearly understand that they must not be interpreted, as the
modern pragmatic tendency concerned much more with the present affairs of
the world than with any high and far-off spiritual possibility seeks to interpret
them, as no more than a philosophical and religious justification of social
service, patriotic, cosmopolitan and humanitarian effort and attachment to the
hundred eager social schemes and dreams which attract the modern intellect.
It is not the rule of a large moral and intellectual altruism which is here
announced, but that of a spiritual unity with God and with this world of beings
who dwell in him and in whom he dwells. It is not an injunction to subordinate
the individual to society and humanity or immolate egoism on the altar of the
human collectivity, but to fulfil the individual in God and to sacrifice the ego
on the one true altar of the all-embracing Divinity. The Gita moves on a plane
of ideas and experiences higher than those of the modern mind which is at
the stage indeed of a struggle to shake off the coils of egoism, but is still
mundane in its outlook and intellectual and moral rather than spiritual in its
temperament. Patriotism, cosmopolitanism, service of society, collectivism,
humanitarianism, the ideal or religion of humanity are admirable aids towards
our escape from our primary condition of individual, family, social, national
egoism into a secondary stage in which the individual realises, as far as it can
be done on the intellectual, moral and emotional level,—on that level he
cannot do it entirely in the right and perfect way, the way of the integral truth
of his being,—the oneness of his existence with the existence of other beings.
But
Page 136

the thought of the Gita reaches beyond to a tertiary condition of our
developing self-consciousness towards which the secondary is only a partial
stage of advance.
\par The Indian social tendency has been to subordinate the individual to the
claims of society, but Indian religious thought and spiritual seeking have been
always loftily individualistic in their aims. An Indian system of thought like the
Gita's cannot possibly fail to put first the development of the individual, the
highest need of the individual, his claim to discover and exercise his largest
spiritual freedom, greatness, splendour, royalty,—his aim to develop into the
illumined seer and king in the spiritual sense of seerdom and kingship, which
was the first great charter of the ideal humanity promulgated by the ancient
Vedic sages. To exceed himself was their goal for the individual, not by
losing all his personal aims in the aims of an organised human society, but by
enlarging, heightening, aggrandising himself into the consciousness of the
Godhead. The rule given here by the Gita is the rule for the master man, the
superman, the divinised human being, the Best, not in the sense of any
Nietzschean, any one-sided and lopsided, any Olympian, Apollonian or
Dionysian, any angelic or demoniac supermanhood, but in that of the man
whose whole personality has been offered up into the being, nature and
consciousness of the one transcendent and universal Divinity and by loss of
the smaller self has found its greater self, has been divinised.
\par To exalt oneself out of the lower imperfect Prakriti, \s{traigu\,nyamay\=i
m\=ay\=a}, into unity with the divine being, consciousness and
nature,
\note{\s{S\=ayujya}, \s{s\=alokya} and \s{s\=ad\,r\'sya} or \s{s\=adharmya}.
\s{S\=adharmya} is becoming of one law of being and action with the Divine.}
\s{madbh\=avam \=agat\=a\,h}, is the object of the Yoga. But when this object is
fulfilled, when the man is in the Brahmic status and sees no longer with the
false egoistic vision himself and the world, but sees all beings in the Self, in
God, and the Self in all beings, God in all beings, what shall be the
action,—since action there still is,—which results from that seeing, and what
shall be the cosmic or individual motive of all his
Page 137

works? It is the question of Arjuna,
\note{\s{ki\.m prabh\=a\,seta kim \=as\=ita vrajeta kim}.} but answered from a
standpoint other than that from which Arjuna had put it. The motive cannot
be personal desire on the intellectual, moral, emotional level, for that has been
abandoned,—even the moral motive has been abandoned, since the liberated
man has passed beyond the lower distinction of sin and virtue, lives in a
glorified purity beyond good and evil. It cannot be the spiritual call to his
perfect self-development by means of disinterested works, for the call has
been answered, the development is perfect and fulfilled. His motive of action
can only be the holding together of the peoples, \s{cik\=ir\,sur lokasa\.ngraham}.
This great march of the peoples towards a far-off divine ideal has to be held
together, prevented from falling into the bewilderment, confusion and utter
discord of the understanding which would lead to dissolution and destruction
and to which the world moving forward in the night or dark twilight of
ignorance would be too easily prone if it were not held together, conducted,
kept to the great lines of its discipline by the illumination, by the strength, by
the rule and example, by the visible standard and the invisible influence of its
Best. The best, the individuals who are in advance of the general line and
above the general level of the collectivity, are the natural leaders of mankind,
for it is they who can point to the race both the way they must follow and the
standard or ideal they have to keep to or to attain. But the divinised man is
the Best in no ordinary sense of the word and his influence, his example must
have a power which that of no ordinarily superior man can exercise. What
example then shall he give? What rule or standard shall he uphold?
\par In order to indicate more perfectly his meaning, the divine Teacher, the
Avatar gives his own example, his own standard to Arjuna. “I abide in the
path of action,” he seems to say, “the path that all men follow; thou too must
abide in action. In the way I act, in that way thou too must act. I am above
the necessity of works, for I have nothing to gain by them; I am the Divine
who possess all things and all beings in the world and I am myself
Page 138

beyond the world as well as in it and I do not depend upon anything or
anyone in all the three worlds for any object; yet I act. This too must be thy
manner and spirit of working. I, the Divine, am the rule and the standard; it is
I who make the path in which men tread; I am the way and the goal. But I do
all this largely, universally, visibly in part, but far more invisibly; and men do
not really know the way of my workings. Thou, when thou knowest and
seest, when thou hast become the divinised man, must be the individual
power of God, the human yet divine example, even as I am in my avatars.
Most men dwell in the ignorance, the God-seer dwells in the knowledge; but
let him not confuse the minds of men by a dangerous example, rejecting in his
superiority the works of the world; let him not cut short the thread of action
before it is spun out, let him not perplex and falsify the stages and gradations
of the ways I have hewn. The whole range of human action has been
decreed by me with a view to the progress of man from the lower to the
higher nature, from the apparent undivine to the conscious Divine. The whole
range of human works must be that in which the God-knower shall move. All
individual, all social action, all the works of the intellect, the heart and the
body are still his, not any longer for his own separate sake, but for the sake of
God in the world, of God in all beings and that all those beings may move
forward, as he has moved, by the path of works towards the discovery of the
Divine in themselves. Outwardly his actions may not seem to differ
essentially from theirs; battle and rule as well as teaching and thought, all the
various commerce of man with man may fall in his range; but the spirit in
which he does them must be very different, and it is that spirit which by its
influence shall be the great attraction drawing men upwards to his own level,
the great lever lifting the mass of men higher in their ascent.”
\par The giving of the example of God himself to the liberated man is
profoundly significant; for it reveals the whole basis of the Gita's philosophy
of divine works. The liberated man is he who has exalted himself into the
divine nature and according to that divine nature must be his actions. But
what is the divine nature? It is not entirely and solely that of the Akshara, the
immobile,
Page 139

inactive, impersonal self; for that by itself would lead the liberated man to
actionless immobility. It is not characteristically that of the Kshara, the
multitudinous, the personal, the Purusha self-subjected to Prakriti; for that by
itself would lead him back into subjection to his personality and to the lower
nature and its qualities. It is the nature of the Purushottama who holds both
these together and by his supreme divinity reconciles them in a divine
reconciliation which is the highest secret of his being, \s{rahasya\.m hyetad
uttamam.} He is not the doer of works in the personal sense of our action
involved in Prakriti; for God works through his power, conscious nature,
effective force,—Shakti, Maya, Prakriti,—but yet above it, not involved in it,
not subject to it, not unable to lift himself beyond the laws, workings, habits of
action it creates, not affected or bound by them, not unable to distinguish
himself, as we are unable, from the workings of life, mind and body. He is the
doer of works who acts not, \s{kart\=aram akart\=aram}. “Know me,” says
Krishna, “for the doer of this (the fourfold law of human workings) who am
yet the imperishable non-doer. Works fix not themselves on me (\s{na
limpanti}), nor have I desire for the fruits of action.” But neither is he the
inactive, impassive, unpuissant Witness and nothing else; for it is he who
works in the steps and measures of his power; every movement of it, every
particle of the world of beings it forms is instinct with his presence, full of his
consciousness, impelled by his will, shaped by his knowledge.
\par He is, besides, the Supreme without qualities who is possessed of all
qualities, \s{nirgu\,no gu\,n\=i}.
\note{{\it Swetaswatara Upanishad}.} He is not bound by any mode of
nature or action, nor consists, as our personality consists, of a sum of
qualities, modes of nature, characteristic operations of the mental, moral,
emotional, vital, physical being, but is the source of all modes and qualities,
capable of developing any he wills in whatever way and to whatever degree
he wills; he is the infinite being of which they are ways of becoming, the
immeasurable quantity and unbound ineffable of which they are measures,
numbers and figures, which they seem to rhythmise
Page 140

and arithmise in the standards of the universe. Yet neither is he merely an
impersonal indeterminate, nor a mere stuff of conscious existence for all
determinations and personalisings to draw upon for their material, but a
supreme Being, the one original conscious Existent, the perfect Personality
capable of all relations even to the most human, concrete and intimate; for he
is friend, comrade, lover, playmate, guide, teacher, master, ministrant of
knowledge or ministrant of joy, yet in all relations unbound, free and absolute.
This too the divinised man becomes in the measure of his attainment,
impersonal in his personality, unbound by quality or action even when
maintaining the most personal and intimate relations with men, unbound by
any \s{dharma} even when following in appearance this or that \s{dharma}.
Neither the dynamism of the kinetic man nor the actionless light of the
ascetic or quietist, neither the vehement personality of the man of action nor
the indifferent impersonality of the philosophic sage is the complete divine
ideal. These are the two conflicting standards of the man of this world and
the ascetic or the quietist philosopher, one immersed in the action of the
Kshara, the other striving to dwell entirely in the peace of the Akshara; but
the complete divine ideal proceeds from the nature of the Purushottama
which transcends this conflict and reconciles all divine possibilities.
\par The kinetic man is not satisfied with any ideal which does not depend
upon the fulfilment of this cosmic nature, this play of the three qualities of
that nature, this human activity of mind and heart and body. The highest
fulfilment of that activity, he might say, is my idea of human perfection, of the
divine possibility in man; some ideal that satisfies the intellect, the heart, the
moral being, some ideal of our human nature in its action can alone satisfy the
human being; he must have something that he can seek in the workings of his
mind and life and body. For that is his nature, his \s{dharma}, and how can
he be fulfilled in something outside his nature? For to his nature each being is
bound and within it he must seek for his perfection. According to our human
nature must be our human perfection; and each man must strive for it
according to the line of his personality, his \s{svadharma}, but
Page 141

in life, in action, not outside life and action. Yes, there is a truth in that, replies
the Gita; the fulfilment of God in man, the play of the Divine in life is part of
the ideal perfection. But if you seek it only in the external, in life, in the
principle of action, you will never find it; for you will then not only act
according to your nature, which is in itself a rule of perfection, but you will
be—and this is a rule of the imperfection—eternally subject to its modes, its
dualities of liking and dislike, pain and pleasure and especially to the rajasic
mode with its principle of desire and its snare of wrath and grief and
longing,—the restless, all-devouring principle of desire, the insatiable fire
which besieges your worldly action, the eternal enemy of knowledge by
which it is covered over here in your nature as is a fire by smoke or a mirror
by dust and which you must slay in order to live in the calm, clear, luminous
truth of the spirit. The senses, mind and intellect are the seat of this eternal
cause of imperfection and yet it is within this sense, mind and intellect, this
play of the lower nature that you would limit your search for perfection! The
effort is vain. The kinetic side of your nature must first seek to add to itself
the quietistic; you must uplift yourself beyond this lower nature to that which
is above the three gunas, that which is founded in the highest principle, in the
soul. Only when you have attained to peace of soul, can you become capable
of a free and divine action.
\par The quietist, the ascetic, on the other hand cannot see any possibility of
perfection into which life and action enter. Are they not the very seat of
bondage and imperfection? Is not all action imperfect in its nature, like a fire
that must produce smoke, is not the principle of action itself rajasic, the father
of desire, a cause that must have its effect of obscuration of knowledge, its
round of longing and success and failure, its oscillations of joy and grief, its
duality of virtue and sin? God may be in the world, but he is not of the world;
he is a God of renunciation and not the Master or cause of our works; the
master of our works is desire and the cause of works is ignorance. If the
world, the Kshara is in a sense a manifestation or a \s{l\=il\=a} of the Divine, it is
an imperfect play with the ignorance of Nature, an obscuration
Page 142

rather than a manifestation. That is surely evident from our very first glance
at the nature of the world and does not the fullest experience of the world
teach us always the same truth? is it not a wheel of the ignorance binding the
soul to continual birth by the impulse of desire and action until at last that is
exhausted or cast away? Not only desire, but action also must be flung away;
seated in the silent self the soul will then pass away into the motionless,
actionless, imperturbable, absolute Brahman. To this objection of the
impersonalising quietist the Gita is at more pains to answer than to that of the
man of the world, the kinetic individual. For this quietism having hold of a
higher and more powerful truth which is yet not the whole or the highest
truth, its promulgation as the universal, complete, highest ideal of human life is
likely to be more confusing and disastrous to the advance of the human race
towards its goal than the error of an exclusive kinetism. A strong one-sided
truth, when set forth as the whole truth, creates a strong light but also a
strong confusion; for the very strength of its element of truth increases the
strength of its element of error. The error of the kinetic ideal can only prolong
the ignorance and retard the human advance by setting it in search of
perfection where perfection cannot be found; but the error of the quietistic
ideal contains in itself the very principle of world-destruction. Were I to act
upon it, says Krishna, I should destroy the peoples and be the author of
confusion; and though the error of an individual human being, even though a
nearly divine man, cannot destroy the whole race, it may produce a
widespread confusion which may be in its nature destructive of the principle
of human life and disturbing to the settled line of its advance.
\par Therefore the quietistic tendency in man must be got to recognise its
own incompleteness and admit on an equality with itself the truth which lies
behind the kinetic tendency,—the fulfilment of God in man and the presence
of the Divine in all the action of the human race. God is there not only in the
silence, but in the action; the quietism of the impassive soul unaffected by
Nature and the kinetism of the soul giving itself to Nature so that the great
world-sacrifice, the Purusha-Yajna, may be
Page 143

effected, are not a reality and a falsehood in perpetual struggle nor yet two
hostile realities, one superior, the other inferior, each fatal to the other; they
are the double term of the divine manifestation. The Akshara alone is not the
whole key of their fulfilment, not the very highest secret. The double
fulfilment, the reconciliation is to be sought in the Purushottama represented
here by Krishna, at once supreme Being, Lord of the worlds and Avatar. The
divinised man entering into his divine nature will act even as he acts; he will
not give himself up to inaction. The Divine is at work in man in the ignorance
and at work in man in the knowledge. To know Him is our soul's highest
welfare and the condition of its perfection, but to know and realise Him as a
transcendent peace and silence is not all; the secret that has to be learned is
at once the secret of the eternal and unborn Divine and the secret of the
divine birth and works, \s{janma karma ca me divyam}. The action which
proceeds from that knowledge, will be free from all bondage; “he who so
knoweth me,” says the Teacher, “is not bound by works.” If the escape from
the obligation of works and desire and from the wheel of rebirth is to be the
aim and the ideal, then this knowledge is to be taken as the true, the broad
way of escape; for, says the Gita, “he who knows in their right principles my
divine birth and works, comes when he leaves his body, not to rebirth, but to
Me, O Arjuna.” Through the knowledge and possession of the divine birth he
comes to the unborn and imperishable Divine who is the self of all beings,
\s{ajo avyaya} \s{\=atm\=a}; through the knowledge and execution of divine
works to the Master of works, the lord of all beings, \s{bh\=ut\=an\=am}
\s{\=i\'svara}. He lives in that unborn being; his works are those of that universal
Mastery.
Page 144

\par
\HN XV
\par
\ht The Possibility and Purpose\nl of Avatarhood
\par\drop In speaking of this Yoga in which action and knowledge become
one, the Yoga of the sacrifice of works with knowledge, in which works are
fulfilled in knowledge, knowledge supports, changes and enlightens works,
and both are offered to the Purushottama, the supreme Divinity who
becomes manifest within us as Narayana, Lord of all our being and action
seated secret in our hearts for ever, who becomes manifest even in the
human form as the Avatar, the divine birth taking possession of our humanity,
Krishna has declared in passing that this was the ancient and original Yoga
which he gave to Vivasvan, the Sun-God, Vivasvan gave it to Manu, the
father of men, Manu gave it to Ikshvaku, head of the Solar line, and so it
came down from royal sage to royal sage till it was lost in the great lapse of
Time and is now renewed for Arjuna, because he is the lover and devotee,
friend and comrade of the Avatar. For this, he says, is the highest
secret,—thus claiming for it a superiority to all other forms of Yoga, because
those others lead to the impersonal Brahman or to a personal Deity, to a
liberation in actionless knowledge or a liberation in absorbed beatitude, but
this gives the highest secret and the whole secret; it brings us to divine peace
and divine works, to divine knowledge, action and ecstasy unified in a perfect
freedom; it unites into itself all the Yogic paths as the highest being of the
Divine reconciles and makes one in itself all the different and even contrary
powers and principles of its manifested being. Therefore this Yoga of the
Gita is not, as some contend, only the Karmayoga, one and the lowest,
according to them, of the three paths, but a highest Yoga synthetic and
integral directing Godward all the powers of our being.
Page 145

\par Arjuna takes the declaration about the transmission of the Yoga in its
most physical sense,—there is another significance in which it can be
taken,—and asks how the Sun-God, one of the first-born of beings, ancestor
of the Solar dynasty, can have received the Yoga from the man Krishna who
is only now born into the world. Krishna does not reply, as we might have
expected him to have done, that it was as the Divine who is the source of all
knowledge that he gave the Word to the Deva who is his form of knowledge,
giver of all inner and outer light,—\s{bharga\,h savitur devasya yo no dhiya\,h
pracoday\=at}; he accepts instead the opportunity which Arjuna gives him of
declaring his concealed Godhead, a declaration for which he had prepared
when he gave himself as the divine example for the worker who is not bound
by his works, but which he has not yet quite explicitly made. He now openly
announces himself as the incarnate Godhead, the Avatar.
\par We have had occasion already, when speaking of the divine Teacher, to
state briefly the doctrine of Avatarhood as it appears to us in the light of
Vedanta, the light in which the Gita presents it to us. We must now look a
little more closely at this Avatarhood and at the significance of the divine
Birth of which it is the outward expression; for that is a link of considerable
importance in the integral teaching of the Gita. And we may first translate the
words of the Teacher himself in which the nature and purpose of Avatarhood
are given summarily and remind ourselves also of other passages or
references which bear upon it. “Many are my lives that are past, and thine
also, O Arjuna; all of them I know, but thou knowest not, O scourge of the
foe. Though I am the unborn, though I am imperishable in my self-existence,
though I am the Lord of all existences, yet I stand upon my own Nature and I
come into birth by my self-Maya. For whensoever there is the fading of the
Dharma and the uprising of unrighteousness, then I loose myself forth into
birth. For the deliverance of the good, for the destruction of the evil-doers, for
the enthroning of the Right I am born from age to age. He who knoweth thus
in its right principles my divine birth and my divine work, when he abandons
his body, comes not to rebirth, he comes to Me,
Page 146

O Arjuna. Delivered from liking and fear and wrath, full of me, taking refuge
in me, many purified by austerity of knowledge have arrived at my nature of
being (\s{madbh\=avam}, the divine nature of the Purushottama). As men
approach me, so I accept them to my love (\s{bhaj\=ami}); men follow in every
way my path, O son of Pritha.”
\par But most men, the Gita goes on to say, desiring the fulfilment of their
works, sacrifice to the gods, to various forms and personalities of the one
Godhead, because the fulfilment (\s{siddhi}) that is born of works,—of works
without knowledge,—is very swift and easy in the human world; it belongs
indeed to that world alone. The other, the divine self-fulfilment in man by the
sacrifice with knowledge to the supreme Godhead, is much more difficult; its
results belong to a higher plane of existence and they are less easily grasped.
Men therefore have to follow the fourfold law of their nature and works and
on this plane of mundane action they seek the Godhead through his various
qualities. But, says Krishna, though I am the doer of the fourfold works and
creator of its fourfold law, yet I must be known also as the non-doer, the
imperishable, the immutable Self. “Works affect me not, nor have I desire for
the fruit of works;” for God is the impersonal beyond this egoistic personality
and this strife of the modes of Nature, and as the Purushottama also, the
impersonal Personality, he possesses this supreme freedom even in works.
Therefore the doer of divine works even while following the fourfold law has
to know and live in that which is beyond, in the impersonal Self and so in the
supreme Godhead. “He who thus knows me is not bound by his works. So
knowing was work done by the men of old who sought liberation; do
therefore, thou also, work of that more ancient kind done by ancient men.”
\par The second portion of these passages which has here been given in
substance, explains the nature of divine works, \s{divya\.m karma}, with the
principle of which we have had to deal in the last essay; the first, which has
been fully translated, explains the way of the divine birth, \s{divya\.m janma},
the Avatarhood. But we have to remark carefully that the upholding of
Dharma in
Page 147

the world is not the only object of the descent of the Avatar, that great
mystery of the Divine manifest in humanity; for the upholding of the Dharma
is not an all-sufficient object in itself, not the supreme possible aim for the
manifestation of a Christ, a Krishna, a Buddha, but is only the general
condition of a higher aim and a more supreme and divine utility. For there are
two aspects of the divine birth; one is a descent, the birth of God in humanity,
the Godhead manifesting itself in the human form and nature, the eternal
Avatar; the other is an ascent, the birth of man into the Godhead, man rising
into the divine nature and consciousness, \s{madbh\=avam \=agata\,h}; it is the
being born anew in a second birth of the soul. It is that new birth which
Avatarhood and the upholding of the Dharma are intended to serve. This
double aspect in the Gita's doctrine of Avatarhood is apt to be missed by the
cursory reader satisfied, as most are, with catching a superficial view of its
profound teachings, and it is missed too by the formal commentator petrified
in the rigidity of the schools. Yet it is necessary, surely, to the whole meaning
of the doctrine. Otherwise the Avatar idea would be only a dogma, a popular
superstition, or an imaginative or mystic deification of historical or legendary
supermen, not what the Gita makes all its teaching, a deep philosophical and
religious truth and an essential part of or step to the supreme mystery of all,
\s{rahasyam uttamam}.
\par If there were not this rising of man into the Godhead to be helped by the
descent of God into humanity, Avatarhood for the sake of the Dharma would
be an otiose phenomenon, since mere Right, mere justice or standards of
virtue can always be upheld by the divine omnipotence through its ordinary
means, by great men or great movements, by the life and work of sages and
kings and religious teachers, without any actual incarnation. The Avatar
comes as the manifestation of the divine nature in the human nature, the
apocalypse of its Christhood, Krishnahood, Buddhahood, in order that the
human nature may by moulding its principle, thought, feeling, action, being on
the lines of that Christhood, Krishnahood, Buddhahood transfigure itself into
the divine. The law, the Dharma which the Avatar establishes
Page 148

is given for that purpose chiefly; the Christ, Krishna, Buddha stands in its
centre as the gate, he makes through himself the way men shall follow. That
is why each Incarnation holds before men his own example and declares of
himself that he is the way and the gate; he declares too the oneness of his
humanity with the divine being, declares that the Son of Man and the Father
above from whom he has descended are one, that Krishna in the human
body, \s{m\=anu\,s\=i\.m tanum \=a\'sritam}, and the supreme Lord and Friend of all
creatures are but two revelations of the same divine Purushottama, revealed
there in his own being, revealed here in the type of humanity.
\par That the Gita contains as its kernel this second and real object of the
Avatarhood, is evident even from this passage by itself rightly considered; but
it becomes much clearer if we take it, not by itself,—always the wrong way
to deal with the texts of the Gita,—but in its right close connection with other
passages and with the whole teaching. We have to remember and take
together its doctrine of the one Self in all, of the Godhead seated in the heart
of every creature, its teaching about the relations between the Creator and
his creation, its strongly emphasised idea of the \s{vibh\=uti},—noting too the
language in which the Teacher gives his own divine example of selfless
works which applies equally to the human Krishna and the divine Lord of the
worlds, and giving their due weight to such passages as that in the ninth
chapter, “Deluded minds despise me lodged in the human body because they
know not my supreme nature of being, Lord of all existences”; and we have
to read in the light of these ideas this passage we find before us and its
declaration that by the knowledge of his divine birth and divine works men
come to the Divine and by becoming full of him and even as he and taking
refuge in him they arrive at his nature and status of being, \s{madbh\=avam}.
For then we shall understand the divine birth and its object, not as an isolated
and miraculous phenomenon, but in its proper place in the whole scheme of
the world-manifestation; without that we cannot arrive at its divine mystery,
but shall either scout it altogether or accept it ignorantly and, it may be,
superstitiously or fall into the petty and superficial ideas of the
Page 149

modern mind about it by which it loses all its inner and helpful significance.
\par For to the modern mind Avatarhood is one of the most difficult to accept
or to understand of all the ideas that are streaming in from the East upon the
rationalised human consciousness. It is apt to take it at the best for a mere
figure for some high manifestation of human power, character, genius, great
work done for the world or in the world, and at the worst to regard it as a
superstition,—to the heathen a foolishness and to the Greeks a
stumbling-block. The materialist, necessarily, cannot even look at it, since he
does not believe in God; to the rationalist or the Deist it is a folly and a thing
of derision; to the thoroughgoing dualist who sees an unbridgeable gulf
between the human and the divine nature, it sounds like a blasphemy. The
rationalist objects that if God exists, he is extracosmic or supracosmic and
does not intervene in the affairs of the world, but allows them to be governed
by a fixed machinery of law,—he is, in fact, a sort of far-off constitutional
monarch or spiritual King Log, at the best an indifferent inactive Spirit behind
the activity of Nature, like some generalised or abstract witness Purusha of
the Sankhyas; he is pure Spirit and cannot put on a body, infinite and cannot
be finite as the human being is finite, the ever unborn creator and cannot be
the creature born into the world,—these things are impossible even to his
absolute omnipotence. To these objections the thoroughgoing dualist would
add that God is in his person, his role and his nature different and separate
from man; the perfect cannot put on human imperfection; the unborn
personal God cannot be born as a human personality; the Ruler of the worlds
cannot be limited in a nature-bound human action and in a perishable human
body. These objections, so formidable at first sight to the reason, seem to
have been present to the mind of the Teacher in the Gita when he says that
although the Divine is unborn, imperishable in his self-existence, the Lord of
all beings, yet he assumes birth by a supreme resort to the action of his
Nature and by force of his self-Maya; that he whom the deluded despise
because lodged in a human body, is verily in his supreme being the Lord of
all; that he is in the action of
Page 150

the divine consciousness the creator of the fourfold Law and the doer of the
works of the world and at the same time in the silence of the divine
consciousness the impartial witness of the works of his own Nature,—for he
is always, beyond both the silence and the action, the supreme Purushottama.
And the Gita is able to meet all these oppositions and to reconcile all these
contraries because it starts from the Vedantic view of existence, of God and
the universe.
\par For in the Vedantic view of things all these apparently formidable
objections are null and void from the beginning. The idea of the Avatar is not
indeed indispensable to its scheme, but it comes in naturally into it as a
perfectly rational and logical conception. For all here is God, is the Spirit or
Self-existence, is Brahman, \s{ekamev\=advit\=iyam},—there is nothing else,
nothing other and different from it and there can be nothing else, can be
nothing other and different from it; Nature is and can be nothing else than a
power of the divine consciousness; all beings are and can be nothing else
than inner and outer, subjective and objective soul-forms and bodily forms of
the divine being which exist in or result from the power of its consciousness.
Far from the Infinite being unable to take on finiteness, the whole universe is
nothing else but that; we can see, look as we may, nothing else at all in the
whole wide world we inhabit. Far from the Spirit being incapable of form or
disdaining to connect itself with form of matter or mind and to assume a
limited nature or a body, all here is nothing but that, the world exists only by
that connection, that assumption. Far from the world being a mechanism of
law with no soul or spirit intervening in the movement of its forces or the
action of its minds and bodies,—only some original indifferent Spirit passively
existing somewhere outside or above it,—the whole world and every particle
of it is on the contrary nothing but the divine force in action and that divine
force determines and governs its every movement, inhabits its every form,
possesses here every soul and mind; all is in God and in him moves and has
its being, in all he is, acts and displays his being; every creature is the
disguised Narayana.
\par Far from the unborn being unable to assume birth, all beings
Page 151

are even in their individuality unborn spirits, eternal without beginning or end,
and in their essential existence and their universality all are the one unborn
Spirit of whom birth and death are only a phenomenon of the assumption and
change of forms. The assumption of imperfection by the perfect is the whole
mystic phenomenon of the universe; but the imperfection appears in the form
and action of the mind or body assumed, subsists in the phenomenon,—in that
which assumes it there is no imperfection, even as in the Sun which illumines
all there is no defect of light or of vision, but only in the capacities of the
individual organ of vision. Nor does God rule the world from some remote
heaven, but by his intimate omnipresence; each finite working of force is an
act of infinite Force and not of a limited separate self-existent energy
labouring in its own underived strength; in every finite working of will and
knowledge we can discover, supporting it, an act of the infinite all-will and
all-knowledge. God's rule is not an absentee, foreign and external
government; he governs all because he exceeds all, but also because he
dwells within all movements and is their absolute soul and spirit. Therefore
none of the objections opposed by our reason to the possibility of Avatarhood
can stand in their principle; for the principle is a vain division made by the
intellectual reason which the whole phenomenon and the whole reality of the
world are busy every moment contradicting and disproving.
\par But still, apart from the possibility, there is the question of the actual
divine working,—whether actually the divine consciousness does appear
coming forward from beyond the veil to act at all directly in the phenomenal,
the finite, the mental and material, the limited, the imperfect. The finite is
indeed nothing but a definition, a face-value of the Infinite's
self-representations to its own variations of consciousness; the real value of
each finite phenomenon is an infinite value, is indeed the very Infinite. Each
being is infinite in its self-existence, whatever it may be in the action of its
phenomenal nature, its temporal self-representation. The man is not, when
we look closely, himself alone, a rigidly
Page 152

separate self-existent individual, but humanity in a mind and body of itself;
and humanity too is no rigidly separate self-existent species or genus, it is the
All-existence, the universal Godhead figuring itself in the type of humanity;
there it works out certain possibilities, develops, evolves, as we now say,
certain powers of its manifestations. What it evolves, is itself, is the Spirit.
\par For what we mean by Spirit is self-existent being with an infinite power
of consciousness and unconditioned delight in its being; it is either that or
nothing, or at least nothing which has anything to do with man and the world
or with which, therefore, man or the world has anything to do. Matter, body is
only a massed motion of force of conscious being employed as a
starting-point for the variable relations of consciousness working through its
power of sense; nor is Matter anywhere really void of consciousness, for
even in the atom, the cell there is, as is now made abundantly clear in spite of
itself by modern Science, a power of will, an intelligence at work; but that
power is the power of will and intelligence of the Self, Spirit or Godhead
within it, it is not the separate, self-derived will or idea of the mechanical cell
or atom. This universal will and intelligence, involved, develops its powers
from form to form, and on earth at least it is in man that it draws nearest to
the full divine and there first becomes, even in the outward intelligence in the
form, obscurely conscious of its divinity. But still there too there is a
limitation, there is that imperfection of the manifestation which prevents the
lower forms from having the self-knowledge of their identity with the Divine.
For in each limited being the limitation of the phenomenal action is
accompanied by a limitation also of the phenomenal consciousness which
defines the nature of the being and makes the inner difference between
creature and creature. The Divine works behind indeed and governs its
special manifestation through this outer and imperfect consciousness and will,
but is itself secret in the cavern, \s{guh\=ay\=am}, as the Veda puts it, or as the
Gita expresses it, “In the heart of all existences the Lord abides turning all
existences as if mounted on a machine by Maya.” This secret working of the
Lord hidden in the heart from the egoistic nature-consciousness through
which he works, is God's universal method with creatures. Why then should
we
Page 153

suppose that in any form he comes forward into the frontal, the phenomenal
consciousness for a more direct and consciously divine action? Obviously, if
at all, then to break the veil between himself and humanity which man limited
in his own nature could never lift.
\par The Gita explains the ordinary imperfect action of the creature by its
subjection to the mechanism of Prakriti and its limitation by the
self-representations of Maya. These two terms are only complementary
aspects of one and the same effective force of divine consciousness. Maya is
not essentially illusion,—the element or appearance of illusion only enters in
by the ignorance of the lower Prakriti, Maya of the three modes of
Nature,—it is the divine consciousness in its power of various
self-representation of its being, while Prakriti is the effective force of that
consciousness which operates to work out each such self-representation
according to its own law and fundamental idea, \s{svabh\=ava} and
\s{svadharma}, in its own proper quality and particular force of working,
\s{gu\,na-karma}. “Leaning—pressing down upon my own Nature (Prakriti) I
create (loose forth into various being) all this multitude of existences, all
helplessly subject to the control of Nature.” Those who know not the Divine
lodged in the human body, are ignorant of it because they are grossly subject
to this mechanism of Prakriti, helplessly subject to its mental limitations and
acquiescent in them, and dwell in an Asuric nature that deludes with desire
and bewilders with egoism the will and the intelligence, \s{mohin\=i\.m prak\,rti\.m}
\s{\'srit\=a\,h}. For the Purushottama within is not readily manifest to any and
every being; he conceals himself in a thick cloud of darkness or a bright cloud
of light, utterly he envelops and wraps himself in his Yogamaya.
\note{\s{n\=aha\.m prak\=a\'sa\,h sarvasya yogam\=ay\=a-sam\=av\,rta\,h}.} “All this world,”
says the Gita, “because it is bewildered by the three states of being
determined by the modes of Nature, fails to recognise me, for this my divine
Maya of the modes of Nature is hard to get beyond; those cross beyond it
who approach Me; but those who dwell in the Asuric nature of being, have
their knowledge reft from them by Maya.” In
Page 154

other words, there is the inherent consciousness of the divine in all, for in all
the Divine dwells; but he dwells there covered by his Maya and the essential
self-knowledge of beings is reft from them, turned into the error of egoism by
the action of Maya, the action of the mechanism of Prakriti. Still by drawing
back from the mechanism of Nature to her inner and secret Master man can
become conscious of the indwelling Divinity.
\par Now it is notable that with a slight but important variation of language
the Gita describes in the same way both the action of the Divine in bringing
about the ordinary birth of creatures and his action in his birth as the Avatar.
“Leaning upon my own Nature, \s{prak\,rti\.m sv\=am ava\,s\,tabhya},” it will say
later, “I loose forth variously, \s{vis\,rj\=ami}, this multitude of creatures
helplessly subject owing to the control of Prakriti, \s{ava\'sa\.m prak\,rter
va\'s\=at}.” “Standing upon my own Nature,” it says here, “I am born by my
self-Maya, \s{prak\,rti\.m sv\=am adhi\,s\,th\=aya}\sdots . . . \s{\=atmam\=ayay\=a}, I loose
forth myself, \s{\=atm\=ana\.m s\,rj\=ami}.” The action implied in the word
\s{ava\,s\,tabhya} is a forceful downward pressure by which the \NH object
controlled is overcome, oppressed, blocked or limited in its movement or
working and becomes helplessly subject to the controlling power, \s{ava\'sa\.m
va\'s\=at}; Nature in this action becomes mechanical and its multitude of
creatures are held helpless in the mechanism, not lords of their own action.
On the contrary the action implied in the word \s{adhi\,s\,th\=aya} is a dwelling in,
but also a standing upon and over the Nature, a conscious control and
government by the indwelling Godhead, \s{adhi\,s\,th\=atr\=i devat\=a}, in which the
Purusha is not helplessly driven by the Prakriti through ignorance, but rather
the Prakriti is full of the light and the will of the Purusha. Therefore in the
normal birth that which is loosed forth,—created, as we say,—is the
multitude of creatures or becomings, \s{bh\=utagr\=amam}; in the divine birth
that which is loosed forth, self-created, is the self-conscious self-existent
being, \s{\=atm\=anam}; for the Vedantic distinction between \s{\=atm\=a} and
\s{bh\=ut\=ani} is that which is made in European philosophy between the Being
and its becomings. In both cases Maya is the means of the creation or
manifestation, but in the divine birth it is by self-Maya, \s{\=atmam\=ayay\=a}, not
the involution in the lower Maya
Page 155

of the ignorance, but the conscious action of the self-existent Godhead in its
phenomenal self-representation, well aware of its operation and its
purpose,—that which the Gita calls elsewhere Yogamaya. In the ordinary
birth Yogamaya is used by the Divine to envelop and conceal itself from the
lower consciousness, so it becomes for us the means of the ignorance,
\s{avidy\=a-m\=ay\=a}; but it is by this same Yogamaya that self-knowledge also is
made manifest in the return of our consciousness to the Divine, it is the
means of the knowledge, \s{vidy\=a-m\=ay\=a}; and in the divine birth it so
operates—as the knowledge controlling and enlightening the works which are
ordinarily done in the Ignorance.
\par The language of the Gita shows therefore that the divine birth is that of
the conscious Godhead in our humanity and essentially the opposite of the
ordinary birth even though the same means are used, because it is not the
birth into the Ignorance, but the birth of the knowledge, not a physical
phenomenon, but a soul-birth. It is the Soul's coming into birth as the
self-existent Being controlling consciously its becoming and not lost to
self-knowledge in the cloud of the ignorance. It is the Soul born into the body
as Lord of Nature, standing above and operating in her freely by its will, not
entangled and helplessly driven round and round in the mechanism; for it
works in the knowledge and not, as most do, in the ignorance. It is the secret
Soul in all coming forward from its governing secrecy behind the veil to
possess wholly in a human type, but as the Divine, the birth which ordinarily it
possesses only from behind the veil as the Ishwara while the outward
consciousness in front of the veil is rather possessed than in possession
because there it is a partially conscious being, the Jiva lost to self-knowledge
and bound in its works through a phenomenal subjection to Nature. The
Avatar
\note{The word Avatara means a descent; it is a coming down of the Divine
below the line which divides the divine from the human world or status.}
therefore is a direct manifestation in humanity by Krishna the divine Soul of
that divine condition of being to which Arjuna, the human soul, the type of a
highest human being, a Vibhuti, is called upon by the Teacher to arise, and to
which he can
Page 156

only arise by climbing out of the ignorance and limitation of his ordinary
humanity. It is the manifestation from above of that which we have to
develop from below; it is the descent of God into that divine birth of the
human being into which we mortal creatures must climb; it is the attracting
divine example given by God to man in the very type and form and perfected
model of our human existence.
Page 157

\par
\HN XVI
\par
\ht The Process of Avatarhood
\par\drop We see that the mystery of the divine Incarnation in man, the
assumption by the Godhead of the human type and the human nature, is in the
view of the Gita only the other side of the eternal mystery of human birth
itself which is always in its essence, though not in its phenomenal
appearance, even such a miraculous assumption. The eternal and universal
self of every human being is God; even his personal self is a part of the
Godhead, \s{mamaiv\=a\.m\'sa\,h},—not a fraction or fragment, surely, since we
cannot think of God as broken up into little pieces, but a partial consciousness
of the one Consciousness, a partial power of the one Power, a partial
enjoyment of world-being by the one and universal Delight of being, and
therefore in manifestation or, as we say, in Nature a limited and finite being
of the one infinite and illimitable Being. The stamp of that limitation is an
ignorance by which he forgets, not only the Godhead from which he came
forth, but the Godhead which is always within him, there living in the secret
heart of his own nature, there burning like a veiled Fire on the inner altar in
his own temple-house of human consciousness.
\par He is ignorant because there is upon the eyes of his soul and all its
organs the seal of that Nature, Prakriti, Maya, by which he has been put forth
into manifestation out of God's eternal being; she has minted him like a coin
out of the precious metal of the divine substance, but overlaid with a strong
coating of the alloy of her phenomenal qualities, stamped with her own stamp
and mark of animal humanity, and although the secret sign of the Godhead is
there, it is at first indistinguishable and always with difficulty decipherable, not
to be really discovered except by that initiation into the mystery of our own
being which distinguishes a Godward from an earthward humanity. In the
Avatar, the divinely-born Man, the real substance shines
Page 158

through the coating; the mark of the seal is there only for form, the vision is
that of the secret Godhead, the power of the life is that of the secret
Godhead, and it breaks through the seals of the assumed human nature; the
sign of the Godhead, an inner soul-sign, not outward, not physical, stands out
legible for all to read who care to see or who can see; for the Asuric nature
is always blind to these things, it sees the body and not the soul, the external
being and not the internal, the mask and not the Person. In the ordinary
human birth the Nature-aspect of the universal Divine assuming humanity
prevails; in the incarnation the God-aspect of the same phenomenon takes its
place. In the one he allows the human nature to take possession of his partial
being and to dominate it; in the other he takes possession of his partial type of
being and its nature and divinely dominates it. Not by evolution or ascent like
the ordinary man, the Gita seems to tell us, not by a growing into the divine
birth, but by a direct descent into the stuff of humanity and a taking up of its
moulds.
\par But it is to assist that ascent or evolution the descent is made or
accepted; that the Gita makes very clear. It is, we might say, to exemplify the
possibility of the Divine manifest in the human being, so that man may see
what that is and take courage to grow into it. It is also to leave the influence
of that manifestation vibrating in the earth-nature and the soul of that
manifestation presiding over its upward endeavour. It is to give a spiritual
mould of divine manhood into which the seeking soul of the human being can
cast itself. It is to give a dharma, a religion,—not a mere creed, but a method
of inner and outer living,—a way, a rule and law of self-moulding by which
he can grow towards divinity. It is too, since this growth, this ascent is no
mere isolated and individual phenomenon, but like all in the divine
world-activities a collective business, a work and the work for the race, to
assist the human march, to hold it together in its great crises, to break the
forces of the downward gravitation when they grow too insistent, to uphold or
restore the great dharma of the Godward law in man's nature, to prepare
even, however far off, the kingdom of God, the victory of the seekers of light
and perfection, \s{s\=adh\=un\=am}, and the overthrow of those
Page 159

who fight for the continuance of the evil and the darkness. All these are
recognised objects of the descent of the Avatar, and it is usually by his work
that the mass of men seek to distinguish him and for that that they are ready
to worship him. It is only the spiritual who see that this external Avatarhood
is a sign, in the symbol of a human life, of the eternal inner Godhead making
himself manifest in the field of their own human mentality and corporeality so
that they can grow into unity with that and be possessed by it. The divine
manifestation of a Christ, Krishna, Buddha in external humanity has for its
inner truth the same manifestation of the eternal Avatar within in our own
inner humanity. That which has been done in the outer human life of earth,
may be repeated in the inner life of all human beings.
\par This is the object of the incarnation, but what is the method? First, we
have the rational or minimising view of Avatarhood which sees in it only an
extraordinary manifestation of the diviner qualities moral, intellectual and
dynamic by which average humanity is exceeded. In this idea there is a
certain truth. The Avatar is at the same time the Vibhuti. This Krishna who
in his divine inner being is the Godhead in a human form, is in his outer human
being the leader of his age, the great man of the Vrishnis. This is from the
point of view of the Nature, not of the soul. The Divine manifests himself
through infinite qualities of his nature and the intensity of the manifestation is
measured by their power and their achievement. The \s{vibh\=uti} of the
Divine is therefore, impersonally, the manifest power of his quality, it is his
outflowing, in whatever form, of Knowledge, Energy, Love, Strength and the
rest; personally, it is the mental form and the animate being in whom this
power is achieved and does its great works. A pre-eminence in this inner and
outer achievement, a greater power of divine quality, an effective energy is
always the sign. The human \s{vibh\=uti} is the hero of the race's struggle
towards divine achievement, the hero in the Carlylean sense of heroism, a
power of God in man. “I am Vasudeva (Krishna) among the Vrishnis,” says
the Lord in the Gita, “Dhananjaya (Arjuna) among the Pandavas, Vyasa
among the sages, the seer-poet Ushanas among the seer-poets,” the first in
each category,
Page 160

the greatest of each group, the most powerfully representative of the qualities
and works in which its characteristic soul-power manifests itself. This
heightening of the powers of the being is a very necessary step in the
progress of the divine manifestation. Every great man who rises above our
average level, raises by that very fact our common humanity; he is a living
assurance of our divine possibilities, a promise of the Godhead, a glow of the
divine Light and a breath of the divine Power.
\par It is this truth which lies behind the natural human tendency to the
deification of great minds and heroic characters; it comes out clearly enough
in the Indian habit of mind which easily sees a partial (\s{a\.m\'sa}) Avatar in
great saints, teachers, founders, or most significantly in the belief of southern
Vaishnavas that some of their saints were incarnations of the symbolic living
weapons of Vishnu,—for that is what all great spirits are, living powers and
weapons of the Divine in the upward march and battle. This idea is innate
and inevitable in any mystic or spiritual view of life which does not draw an
inexorable line between the being and nature of the Divine and our human
being and nature; it is the sense of the divine in humanity. But still the Vibhuti
is not the Avatar; otherwise Arjuna, Vyasa, Ushanas would be Avatars as
well as Krishna, even if in a less degree of the power of Avatarhood. The
divine quality is not enough; there must be the inner consciousness of the
Lord and Self governing the human nature by his divine presence. The
heightening of the power of the qualities is part of the becoming,
\s{bh\=utagr\=ama}, an ascent in the ordinary manifestation; in the Avatar there
is the special manifestation, the divine birth from above, the eternal and
universal Godhead descended into a form of individual humanity, \s{\=atm\=ana\.m
s\,rj\=ami}, and conscious not only behind the veil but in the outward nature.
\par There is an intermediary idea, a more mystical view of Avatarhood
which supposes that a human soul calls down this descent into himself and is
either possessed by the divine consciousness or becomes an effective
reflection or channel of it. This view rests upon certain truths of spiritual
experience. The divine birth in man, his ascent, is itself a growing of the
human
Page 161

into the divine consciousness, and in its intensest culmination is a losing of the
separate self in that. The soul merges its individuality in an infinite and
universal being or loses it in the heights of a transcendent being; it becomes
one with the Self, the Brahman, the Divine or, as it is sometimes more
absolutely put, becomes the one Self, the Brahman, the Divine. The Gita itself
speaks of the soul becoming the Brahman, \s{brahmabh\=uta}, and of its
thereby dwelling in the Lord, in Krishna, but it does not, it must be marked,
speak of it as becoming the Lord or the Purushottama, though it does declare
that the Jiva himself is always Ishwara, the partial being of the Lord,
\s{mamaiv\=a\.m\'sa\,h}. For this greatest union, this highest becoming is still part
of the ascent; while it is the divine birth to which every Jiva arrives, it is not
the descent of the Godhead, not Avatarhood, but at most Buddhahood
according to the doctrine of the Buddhists, it is the soul awakened from its
present mundane individuality into an infinite superconsciousness. That need
not carry with it either the inner consciousness or the characteristic action of
the Avatar.
\par On the other hand, this entering into the divine consciousness may be
attended by a reflex action of the Divine entering or coming forward into the
human parts of our being, pouring himself into the nature, the activity, the
mentality, the corporeality even of the man; and that may well be at least a
partial Avatarhood. The Lord stands in the heart, says the Gita,—by which it
means of course the heart of the subtle being, the nodus of the emotions,
sensations, mental consciousness, where the individual Purusha also is
seated,—but he stands there veiled, enveloped by his Maya. But above, on a
plane within us but now superconscient to us, called heaven by the ancient
mystics, the Lord and the Jiva stand together revealed as of one essence of
being, the Father and the Son of certain symbolisms, the Divine Being and the
divine Man who comes forth from Him born of the higher divine
Nature,
\note{In the Buddhist legend the name of the mother of Buddha makes the
symbolism clear; in the Christian the symbol seems to have been attached by
a familiar mythopoeic process to the actual human mother of Jesus of
Nazareth.} the virgin Mother, \s{par\=a prak\,rti},
Page 162

\s{par\=a m\=ay\=a}, into the lower or human nature. This seems to be the inner
doctrine of the Christian incarnation; in its Trinity the Father is above in this
inner Heaven; the Son or supreme Prakriti become Jiva of the Gita descends
as the divine Man upon earth, in the mortal body; the Holy Spirit, pure Self,
Brahmic consciousness is that which makes them one and that also in which
they communicate; for we hear of the Holy Spirit descending upon Jesus and
it is the same descent which brings down the powers of the higher
consciousness into the simple humanity of the Apostles.
\par But also the higher divine consciousness of the Purushottama may itself
descend into the humanity and that of the Jiva disappear into it. This is said
by his contemporaries to have happened in the occasional transfigurations of
Chaitanya when he who in his normal consciousness was only the lover and
devotee of the Lord and rejected all deification, became in these abnormal
moments the Lord himself and so spoke and acted, with all the outflooding
light and love and power of the divine Presence. Supposing this to be the
normal condition, the human receptacle to be constantly no more than a
vessel of this divine Presence and divine Consciousness, we should have the
Avatar according to this intermediary idea of the incarnation. That easily
recommends itself as possible to our human notions; for if the human being
can elevate his nature so as to feel a unity with the being of the Divine and
himself a mere channel of its consciousness, light, power, love, his own will
and personality lost in that will and that being,—and this is a recognised
spiritual status,—then there is no inherent impossibility of the reflex action of
that Will, Being, Power, Love, Light, Consciousness occupying the whole
personality of the human Jiva. And this would not be merely an ascent of our
humanity into the divine birth and the divine nature, but a descent of the
divine Purusha into humanity, an Avatar.
\par The Gita, however, goes much farther. It speaks clearly of the Lord
himself being born; Krishna speaks of his many births that are past and
makes it clear by his language that it is not merely the receptive human being
but the Divine of whom he makes this affirmation, because he uses the very
language of
Page 163

the Creator, the same language which he will employ when he has to
describe his creation of the world. “Although I am the unborn Lord of
creatures, I create (loose forth) my {\it self} by my Maya,” presiding over
the actions of my Prakriti. Here there is no question of the Lord and the
human Jiva or of the Father and the Son, the divine Man, but only of the Lord
and his Prakriti. The Divine descends by his own Prakriti into birth in its
human form and type and brings into it the divine Consciousness and the
divine Power, though consenting, though willing to act in the form, type,
mould of humanity, and he governs its actions in the body as the indwelling
and over-dwelling Soul, \s{adhi\,s\,th\=aya}. From above he governs always,
indeed, for so he governs all nature, the human included; from within also he
governs all nature, always, but hidden; the difference here is that he is
manifest, that the nature is conscious of the divine Presence as the Lord, the
Inhabitant, and it is not by his secret will from above, “the will of the Father
which is in heaven,” but by his quite direct and apparent will that he moves
the nature. And here there seems to be no room for the human intermediary;
for it is by resort to his own nature, \s{prak\,rti\.m sv\=am}, and not the special
nature of the Jiva that the Lord of all existence thus takes upon himself the
human birth.
\par This doctrine is a hard saying, a difficult thing for the human reason to
accept; and for an obvious reason, because of the evident humanity of the
Avatar. The Avatar is always a dual phenomenon of divinity and humanity;
the Divine takes upon himself the human nature with all its outward
limitations and makes them the circumstances, means, instruments of the
divine consciousness and the divine power, a vessel of the divine birth and the
divine works. But so surely it must be, since otherwise the object of the
Avatar's descent is not fulfilled; for that object is precisely to show that the
human birth with all its limitations can be made such a means and instrument
of the divine birth and divine works, precisely to show that the human type of
consciousness can be compatible with the divine essence of consciousness
made manifest, can be converted into its vessel, drawn into nearer conformity
with it by a change of its mould
Page 164

and a heightening of its powers of light and love and strength and purity; and
to show also how it can be done. If the Avatar were to act in an entirely
supernormal fashion, this object would not be fulfilled. A merely supernormal
or miraculous Avatar would be a meaningless absurdity; not that there need
be an entire absence of the use of supernormal powers such as Christ's
so-called miracles of healing, for the use of supernormal powers is quite a
possibility of human nature; but there need not be that at all, nor in any case
is it the root of the matter, nor would it at all do if the life were nothing else
but a display of supernormal fireworks. The Avatar does not come as a
thaumaturgic magician, but as the divine leader of humanity and the exemplar
of a divine humanity. Even human sorrow and physical suffering he must
assume and use so as to show, first, how that suffering may be a means of
redemption,—as did Christ,—secondly, to show how, having been assumed
by the divine soul in the human nature, it can also be overcome in the same
nature,—as did Buddha. The rationalist who would have cried to Christ, “If
thou art the Son of God, come down from the cross,” or points out sagely that
the Avatar was not divine because he died and died too by disease,—as a
dog dieth,—knows not what he is saying: for he has missed the root of the
whole matter. Even, the Avatar of sorrow and suffering must come before
there can be the Avatar of divine joy; the human limitation must be assumed
in order to show how it can be overcome; and the way and the extent of the
overcoming, whether internal only or external also, depends upon the stage of
the human advance; it must not be done by a non-human miracle.
\par The question then arises, and it is the sole real difficulty, for here the
intellect falters and stumbles over its own limits, how is this human mind and
body assumed? For they were not created suddenly and all of a piece, but by
some kind of evolution, physical or spiritual or both. No doubt, the descent of
the Avatar, like the divine birth from the other side, is essentially a spiritual
phenomenon, as is shown by the Gita's \s{\=atm\=ana\.m s\,rj\=ami}, it is a soul-birth;
but still there is here an attendant physical birth. How then were this human
mind and body of
Page 165

the Avatar created? If we suppose that the body is always created by the
hereditary evolution, by inconscient Nature and its immanent Life-spirit
without the intervention of the individual soul, the matter becomes simple. A
physical and mental body is prepared fit for the divine incarnation by a pure
or great heredity and the descending Godhead takes possession of it. But the
Gita in this very passage applies the doctrine of reincarnation, boldly enough,
to the Avatar himself, and in the usual theory of reincarnation the
reincarnating soul by its past spiritual and psychological evolution itself
determines and in a way prepares its own mental and physical body. The soul
prepares its own body, the body is not prepared for it without any reference
to the soul. Are we then to suppose an eternal or continual Avatar himself
evolving, we might say, his own fit mental and physical body according to the
needs and pace of the human evolution and so appearing from age to age,
\s{yuge yuge}? In some such spirit some would interpret the ten incarnations
of Vishnu, first in animal forms, then in the animal man, then in the dwarf
man-soul, Vamana, the violent Asuric man, Rama of the axe, the
divinely-natured man, a greater Rama, the awakened spiritual man, Buddha,
and, preceding him in time, but final in place, the complete divine manhood,
Krishna,—for the last Avatar, Kalki, only accomplishes the work Krishna
began,—he fulfils in power the great struggle which the previous Avatars
prepared in all its potentialities. It is a difficult assumption to our modern
mentality, but the language of the Gita seems to demand it. Or, since the Gita
does not expressly solve the problem, we may solve it in some other way of
our own, as that the body is prepared by the Jiva but assumed from birth by
the Godhead or that it is prepared by one of the four Manus, \s{catv\=aro
manava\,h}, of the Gita, the spiritual Fathers of every human mind and body.
This is going far into the mystic field from which the modern reason is still
averse; but once we admit Avatarhood, we have already entered into it and,
once entered, may as well tread in it with firm footsteps.
\par There the Gita's doctrine of Avatarhood stands. We have had to advert
to it at length in this aspect of its method, as we
Page 166

did to the question of its possibility, because it is necessary to look at it and
face the difficulties which the reasoning mind of man is likely to offer to it. It
is true that the physical Avatarhood does not fill a large space in the Gita, but
still it does occupy a definite place in the chain of its teachings and is implied
in the whole scheme, the very framework being the Avatar leading the
\s{vibh\=uti}, the man who has risen to the greatest heights of mere manhood,
to the divine birth and divine works. No doubt, too, the inner descent of the
Godhead to raise the human soul into himself is the main thing,—it is the inner
Christ, Krishna or Buddha that matters. But just as the outer life is of
immense importance for the inner development, so the external Avatarhood is
of no mean importance for this great spiritual manifestation. The
consummation in the mental and physical symbol assists the growth of the
inner reality; afterwards the inner reality expresses itself with greater power
in a more perfect symbolisation of itself through the outer life. Between these
two, spiritual reality and mental and physical expression, acting and returning
upon each other constantly the manifestation of the Divine in humanity has
elected to move always in the cycles of its concealment and its revelation.
Page 167

\par
\HN XVII
\par
\ht The Divine Birth and Divine Works
\par\drop The work for which the Avatar descends has like his birth a double
sense and a double form. It has an outward side of the divine force acting
upon the external world in order to maintain there and to reshape the divine
law by which the Godward effort of humanity is kept from decisive
retrogression and instead decisively carried forward in spite of the rule of
action and reaction, the rhythm of advance and relapse by which Nature
proceeds. It has an inward side of the divine force of the Godward
consciousness acting upon the soul of the individual and the soul of the race,
so that it may receive new forms of revelation of the Divine in man and may
be sustained, renewed and enriched in its power of upward self-unfolding.
The Avatar does not descend merely for a great outward action, as the
pragmatic sense in humanity is too often tempted to suppose. Action and
event have no value in themselves, but only take their value from the force
which they represent and the idea which they symbolise and which the force
is there to serve.
\par The crisis in which the Avatar appears, though apparent to the outward
eye only as a crisis of events and great material changes, is always in its
source and real meaning a crisis in the consciousness of humanity when it
has to undergo some grand modification and effect some new development.
For this action of change a divine force is needed; but the force varies
always according to the power of consciousness which it embodies; hence
the necessity of a divine consciousness manifesting in the mind and soul of
humanity. Where, indeed, the change is mainly intellectual and practical, the
intervention of the Avatar is not needed; there is a great uplifting of
consciousness, a great manifestation of power in which men are for the time
being exalted above their normal selves, and this surge of consciousness and
power finds its wave-crests in certain exceptional individuals,
Page 168

\s{vibh\=utis}, whose action leading the general action is sufficient for the
change intended. The Reformation in Europe and the French Revolution
were crises of this character; they were not great spiritual events, but
intellectual and practical changes, one in religious, the other in social and
political ideas, forms and motives, and the modification of the general
consciousness brought about was a mental and dynamic, but not a spiritual
modification. But when the crisis has a spiritual seed or intention, then a
complete or a partial manifestation of the God-consciousness in a human
mind and soul comes as its originator or leader. That is the Avatar.
\par The outward action of the Avatar is described in the Gita as the
restoration of the Dharma; when from age to age the Dharma fades,
languishes, loses force and its opposite arises, strong and oppressive, then the
Avatar comes and raises it again to power; and as these things in idea are
always represented by things in action and by human beings who obey their
impulsion, his mission is, in its most human and outward terms, to relieve the
seekers of the Dharma who are oppressed by the reign of the reactionary
darkness and to destroy the wrong-doers who seek to maintain the denial of
the Dharma. But the language used can easily be given a poor and
insufficient connotation which would deprive Avatarhood of all its spiritual
depth of meaning. Dharma is a word which has an ethical and practical, a
natural and philosophical and a religious and spiritual significance, and it may
be used in any of these senses exclusive of the others, in a purely ethical, a
purely philosophical or a purely religious sense. Ethically it means the law of
righteousness, the moral rule of conduct, or in a still more outward and
practical significance social and political justice, or even simply the
observation of the social law. If used in this sense we shall have to
understand that when unrighteousness, injustice and oppression prevail, the
Avatar descends to deliver the good and destroy the wicked, to break down
injustice and oppression and restore the ethical balance of mankind.
\par Thus the popular and mythical account of the Krishna avatar is that the
unrighteousness of the Kurus as incarnated
Page 169

in Duryodhana and his brothers became so great a burden to the earth that
she had to call upon God to descend and lighten her load; accordingly Vishnu
incarnated as Krishna, delivered the oppressed Pandavas and destroyed the
unjust Kauravas. A similar account is given of the descent of the previous
Vishnu avatars, of Rama to destroy the unrighteous oppression of Ravana, of
Parashurama to destroy the unrighteous license of the military and princely
caste, the Kshatriyas, of the dwarf Vamana to destroy the rule of the Titan
Bali. But obviously the purely practical, ethical or social and political mission
of the Avatar which is thus thrown into popular and mythical form, does not
give a right account of the phenomenon of Avatarhood. It does not cover its
spiritual sense, and if this outward utility were all, we should have to exclude
Buddha and Christ whose mission was not at all to destroy evil-doers and
deliver the good, but to bring to all men a new spiritual message and a new
law of divine growth and spiritual realisation. On the other hand, if we give to
the word dharma only its religious sense, in which it means a law of religious
and spiritual life, we shall indeed get to the kernel of the matter, but we shall
be in danger of excluding a most important part of the work done by the
Avatar. Always we see in the history of the divine incarnations the double
work, and inevitably, because the Avatar takes up the workings of God in
human life, the way of the divine Will and Wisdom in the world, and that
always fulfils itself externally as well as internally, by inner progress in the
soul and by an outer change in the life.
\par The Avatar may descend as a great spiritual teacher and saviour, the
Christ, the Buddha, but always his work leads, after he has finished his
earthly manifestation, to a profound and powerful change not only in the
ethical, but in the social and outward life and ideals of the race. He may, on
the other hand, descend as an incarnation of the divine life, the divine
personality and power in its characteristic action, for a mission ostensibly
social, ethical and political, as is represented in the story of Rama or Krishna;
but always then this descent becomes in the soul of the race a permanent
power for the inner living and the spiritual rebirth. It is indeed curious to note
that the
Page 170

permanent, vital, universal effect of Buddhism and Christianity has been the
force of their ethical, social and practical ideals and their influence even on
the men and the ages which have rejected their religious and spiritual beliefs,
forms and disciplines; later Hinduism which rejected Buddha, his \s{sa\.ngha}
and his \s{dharma}, bears the ineffaceable imprint of the social and ethical
influence of Buddhism and its effect on the ideas and the life of the race,
while in modern Europe, Christian only in name, humanitarianism is the
translation into the ethical and social sphere and the aspiration to liberty,
equality and fraternity the translation into the social and political sphere of the
spiritual truths of Christianity, the latter especially being effected by men who
aggressively rejected the Christian religion and spiritual discipline and by an
age which in its intellectual effort of emancipation tried to get rid of
Christianity as a creed. On the other hand the life of Rama and Krishna
belongs to the prehistoric past which has come down only in poetry and
legend and may even be regarded as myths; but it is quite immaterial whether
we regard them as myths or historical facts, because their permanent truth
and value lie in their persistence as a spiritual form, presence, influence in the
inner consciousness of the race and the life of the human soul. Avatarhood is
a fact of divine life and consciousness which may realise itself in an outward
action, but must persist, when that action is over and has done its work, in a
spiritual influence; or may realise itself in a spiritual influence and teaching,
but must then have its permanent effect, even when the new religion or
discipline is exhausted, in the thought, temperament and outward life of
mankind.
\par We must then, in order to understand the Gita's description of the work
of the Avatar, take the idea of the Dharma in its fullest, deepest and largest
conception, as the inner and the outer law by which the divine Will and
Wisdom work out the spiritual evolution of mankind and its circumstances
and results in the life of the race. Dharma in the Indian conception is not
merely the good, the right, morality and justice, ethics; it is the whole
government of all the relations of man with other beings, with Nature, with
God, considered from the point of view of a divine
Page 171

principle working itself out in forms and laws of action, forms of the inner and
the outer life, orderings of relations of every kind in the world.
Dharma
\note{The word means “holding” from the root \s{dh\,r}, to hold.} is both that
which we hold to and that which holds together our inner and outer activities.
In its primary sense it means a fundamental law of our nature which secretly
conditions all our activities, and in this sense each being, type, species,
individual, group has its own dharma. Secondly, there is the divine nature
which has to develop and manifest in us, and in this sense dharma is the law
of the inner workings by which that grows in our being. Thirdly, there is the
law by which we govern our outgoing thought and action and our relations
with each other so as to help best both our own growth and that of the human
race towards the divine ideal.
\par Dharma is generally spoken of as something eternal and unchanging, and
so it is in the fundamental principle, in the ideal, but in its forms it is
continually changing and evolving, because man does not already possess the
ideal or live in it, but aspires more or less perfectly towards it, is growing
towards its knowledge and practice. And in this growth dharma is all that
helps us to grow into the divine purity, largeness, light, freedom, power,
strength, joy, love, good, unity, beauty, and against it stands its shadow and
denial, all that resists its growth and has not undergone its law, all that has not
yielded up and does not will to yield up its secret of divine values, but
presents a front of perversion and contradiction, of impurity, narrowness,
bondage, darkness, weakness, vileness, discord and suffering and division,
and the hideous and the crude, all that man has to leave behind in his
progress. This is the \s{adharma}, not-dharma, which strives with and seeks
to overcome the dharma, to draw backward and downward, the reactionary
force which makes for evil, ignorance and darkness. Between the two there
is perpetual battle and struggle, oscillation of victory and defeat in which
sometimes the upward and sometimes the downward forces prevail. This has
been typified in the Vedic image of the struggle between the divine and the
Titanic powers, the sons
Page 172

of the Light and the undivided Infinity and the children of the Darkness and
Division, in Zoroastrianism by Ahuramazda and Ahriman, and in later
religions in the contest between God and his angels and Satan or Iblis and his
demons for the possession of human life and the human soul.
\par It is these things that condition and determine the work of the Avatar. In
the Buddhistic formula the disciple takes refuge from all that opposes his
liberation in three powers, the \s{dharma}, the \s{sa\.ngha}, the Buddha. So in
Christianity we have the law of Christian living, the Church and the Christ.
These three are always the necessary elements of the work of the Avatar.
He gives a dharma, a law of self-discipline by which to grow out of the lower
into the higher life and which necessarily includes a rule of action and of
relations with our fellowmen and other beings, endeavour in the eightfold path
or the law of faith, love and purity or any other such revelation of the nature
of the divine in life. Then because every tendency in man has its collective as
well as its individual aspect, because those who follow one way are naturally
drawn together into spiritual companionship and unity, he establishes the
\s{sa\.ngha}, the fellowship and union of those whom his personality and his
teaching unite. In Vaishnavism there is the same trio, \s{bh\=agavata},
\s{bhakta}, \s{bhagav\=an},—the \s{bh\=agavata}, which is the law of the
Vaishnava dispensation of adoration and love, the \s{bhakta} representing the
fellowship of those in whom that law is manifest, \s{bhagav\=an}, the divine
Lover and Beloved in whose being and nature the divine law of love is
founded and fulfils itself. The Avatar represents this third element, the divine
personality, nature and being who is the soul of the dharma and the
\s{sa\.ngha}, informs them with himself, keeps them living and draws men
towards the felicity and the liberation.
\par In the teaching of the Gita, which is more catholic and complex than
other specialised teachings and disciplines, these things assume a larger
meaning. For the unity here is the all-embracing Vedantic unity by which the
soul sees all in itself and itself in all and makes itself one with all beings. The
dharma
Page 173

is therefore the taking up of all human relations into a higher divine meaning;
starting from the established ethical, social and religious rule which binds
together the whole community in which the God-seeker lives, it lifts it up by
informing it with the Brahmic consciousness; the law it gives is the law of
oneness, of equality, of liberated, desireless, God-governed action, of
God-knowledge and self-knowledge enlightening and drawing to itself all the
nature and all the action, drawing it towards divine being and divine
consciousness, and of God-love as the supreme power and crown of the
knowledge and the action. The idea of companionship and mutual aid in
God-love and God-seeking which is at the basis of the idea of the \s{sa\.ngha}
or divine fellowship, is brought in when the Gita speaks of the seeking of God
through love and adoration, but the real \s{sa\.ngha} of this teaching is all
humanity. The whole world is moving towards this dharma, each man
according to his capacity,—“it is my path that men follow in every
way,”—and the God-seeker, making himself one with all, making their joy
and sorrow and all their life his own, the liberated made already one self with
all beings, lives in the life of humanity, lives for the one Self in humanity, for
God in all beings, acts for \s{lokasa\.ngraha}, for the maintaining of all in their
dharma and the Dharma, for the maintenance of their growth in all its stages
and in all its paths towards the Divine. For the Avatar here, though he is
manifest in the name and form of Krishna, lays no exclusive stress on this
one form of his human birth, but on that which it represents, the Divine, the
Purushottama, of whom all Avatars are the human births, of whom all forms
and names of the Godhead worshipped by men are the figures. The way
declared by Krishna here is indeed announced as the way by which man can
reach the real knowledge and the real liberation, but it is one that is inclusive
of all paths and not exclusive. For the Divine takes up into his universality all
Avatars and all teachings and all dharmas.
\par The Gita lays stress upon the struggle of which the world is the theatre,
in its two aspects, the inner struggle and the outer battle. In the inner struggle
the enemies are within, in
Page 174

the individual, and the slaying of desire, ignorance, egoism is the victory. But
there is an outer struggle between the powers of the Dharma and the
Adharma in the human collectivity. The former is supported by the divine, the
godlike nature in man, and by those who represent it or strive to realise it in
human life, the latter by the Titanic or demoniac, the Asuric and Rakshasic
nature whose head is a violent egoism, and by those who represent and strive
to satisfy it. This is the war of the Gods and Titans, the symbol of which the
old Indian literature is full, the struggle of the Mahabharata of which Krishna
is the central figure being often represented in that image; the Pandavas who
fight for the establishment of the kingdom of the Dharma, are the sons of the
Gods, their powers in human form, their adversaries are incarnations of the
Titanic powers, they are Asuras. This outer struggle too the Avatar comes to
aid, directly or indirectly, to destroy the reign of the Asuras, the evil-doers,
and in them depress the power they represent and to restore the oppressed
ideals of the Dharma. He comes to bring nearer the kingdom of heaven on
earth in the collectivity as well as to build the kingdom of heaven within in the
individual human soul.
\par The inner fruit of the Avatar's coming is gained by those who learn from
it the true nature of the divine birth and the divine works and who, growing
full of him in their consciousness and taking refuge in him with their whole
being, \s{manmay\=a m\=am up\=a\'srit\=a\,h}, purified by the realising force of their
knowledge and delivered from the lower nature, attain to the divine being and
divine nature, \s{madbh\=avam}. The Avatar comes to reveal the divine nature
in man above this lower nature and to show what are the divine works, free,
unegoistic, disinterested, impersonal, universal, full of the divine light, the
divine power and the divine love. He comes as the divine personality which
shall fill the consciousness of the human being and replace the limited egoistic
personality, so that it shall be liberated out of ego into infinity and universality,
out of birth into immortality. He comes as the divine power and love which
calls men to itself, so that they may take refuge in that and no longer in the
insufficiency
Page 175

of their human wills and the strife of their human fear, wrath and passion, and
liberated from all this unquiet and suffering may live in the calm and bliss of
the Divine.
\note{\s{janma karma ca me divyam eva\.m yo vetti
tattvata\,h,\nl\phantom{\quad   } tyaktv\=a deha\.m punarjanma naiti m\=am eti
so'rjuna.\nl\phantom{\quad   } v\=itar\=agabhayakrodh\=a manmay\=a m\=am
up\=a\'srit\=a\,h,\nl\phantom{\quad   } bahavo j\~n\=anatapas\=a p\=ut\=a madbh\=avam
\=agat\=a\,h.}} Nor does it matter essentially in what form and name or putting
forward what aspect of the Divine he comes; for in all ways, varying with
their nature, men are following the path set to them by the Divine which will
in the end lead them to him and the aspect of him which suits their nature is
that which they can best follow when he comes to lead them; in whatever
way men accept, love and take joy in God, in that way God accepts, loves
and takes joy in man. \s{Ye yath\=a m\=a\.m prapadyante t\=a\.ms tathaiva
bhaj\=amyaham}.
Page 176

\par
\HN XVIII
\par
\ht The Divine Worker
\par\drop To attain to the divine birth,—a divinising new birth of the soul into
a higher consciousness,—and to do divine works both as a means towards
that before it is attained and as an expression of it after it is attained, is then
all the Karmayoga of the Gita. The Gita does not try to define works by any
outward signs through which it can be recognisable to an external gaze,
measurable by the criticism of the world; it deliberately renounces even the
ordinary ethical distinctions by which men seek to guide themselves in the
light of the human reason. The signs by which it distinguishes divine works
are all profoundly intimate and subjective; the stamp by which they are
known is invisible, spiritual, supra-ethical.
\par They are recognisable only by the light of the soul from which they
come. For, it says, “what is action and what is inaction, as to this even the
sages are perplexed and deluded,” because, judging by practical, social,
ethical, intellectual standards, they discriminate by accidentals and do not go
to the root of the matter; “I will declare to thee that action by the knowledge
of which thou shalt be released from all ills. One has to understand about
action as well as to understand about wrong action and about inaction one
has to understand; thick and tangled is the way of works.” Action in the
world is like a deep forest, \s{gahana}, through which man goes stumbling as
best he can, by the light of the ideas of his time, the standards of his
personality, his environment, or rather of many times, many personalities,
layers of thought and ethics from many social stages all inextricably confused
together, temporal and conventional amidst all their claim to absoluteness and
immutable truth, empirical and irrational in spite of their aping of right reason.
And finally the sage seeking in the midst of it all a highest foundation of fixed
law and an original truth finds himself obliged to raise the
Page 177

last supreme question, whether all action and life itself are not a delusion and
a snare and whether cessation from action, \s{akarma}, is not the last resort
of the tired and disillusioned human soul. But, says Krishna, in this matter
even the sages are perplexed and deluded. For by action, by works, not by
inaction comes the knowledge and the release.
\par What then is the solution? what is that type of works by which we shall
be released from the ills of life, from this doubt, this error, this grief, from this
mixed, impure and baffling result even of our purest and best-intentioned acts,
from these million forms of evil and suffering? No outward distinctions need
be made, is the reply; no work the world needs, be shunned; no limit or hedge
set round our human activities; on the contrary, all actions should be done, but
from a soul in Yoga with the Divine, \s{yukta\,h k\,rtsna-karma-k\,rt}.
\s{Akarma}, cessation from action is not the way; the man who has attained
to the insight of the highest reason, perceives that such inaction is itself a
constant action, a state subject to the workings of Nature and her qualities.
The mind that takes refuge in physical inactivity, is still under the delusion that
it and not Nature is the doer of works; it has mistaken inertia for liberation; it
does not see that even in what seems absolute inertia greater than that of the
stone or clod, Nature is at work, keeps unimpaired her hold. On the contrary
in the full flood of action the soul is free from its works, is not the doer, not
bound by what is done, and he who lives in the freedom of the soul, not in the
bondage of the modes of Nature, alone has release from works. This is what
the Gita clearly means when it says that he who in action can see inaction
and can see action still continuing in cessation from works, is the man of true
reason and discernment among men. This saying hinges upon the Sankhya
distinction between Purusha and Prakriti, between the free inactive soul,
eternally calm, pure and unmoved in the midst of works, and ever active
Nature operative as much in inertia and cessation as in the overt turmoil of
her visible hurry of labour. This is the knowledge which the highest effort of
the discriminating reason, the \s{buddhi}, gives to us, and therefore whoever
possesses it is the truly rational and discerning man,
Page 178

\s{sa buddhim\=an manu\,sye\,su},—not the perplexed thinker who judges life and
works by the external, uncertain and impermanent distinctions of the lower
reason. Therefore the liberated man is not afraid of action, he is a large and
universal doer of all works, \s{k\,rtsna-karma-k\,rt}; not as others do them in
subjection to Nature, but poised in the silent calm of the soul, tranquilly in
Yoga with the Divine. The Divine is the lord of his works, he is only their
channel through the instrumentality of his nature conscious of and subject to
her Lord. By the flaming intensity and purity of this knowledge all his works
are burned up as in a fire and his mind remains without any stain or
disfiguring mark from them, calm, silent, unperturbed, white and clean and
pure. To do all in this liberating knowledge, without the personal egoism of
the doer, is the first sign of the divine worker.
\par The second sign is freedom from desire; for where there is not the
personal egoism of the doer, desire becomes impossible; it is starved out,
sinks for want of a support, dies of inanition. Outwardly the liberated man
seems to undertake works of all kinds like other men, on a larger scale
perhaps with a more powerful will and driving-force, for the might of the
divine will works in his active nature; but from all his inceptions and
undertakings the inferior concept and nether will of desire is entirely
banished, \s{sarve sam\=arambh\=a\,h k\=amasa\.nkalpavarjit\=a\,h}. He has abandoned
all attachment to the fruits of his works, and where one does not work for the
fruit, but solely as an impersonal instrument of the Master of works, desire
can find no place,—not even the desire to serve successfully, for the fruit is
the Lord's and determined by him and not by the personal will and effort, or
to serve with credit and to the Master's satisfaction, for the real doer is the
Lord himself and all glory belongs to a form of his Shakti missioned in the
nature and not to the limited human personality. The human mind and soul of
the liberated man does nothing, \s{na ki\~ncit karoti}; even though through his
nature he engages in action, it is the Nature, the executive Shakti, it is the
conscious Goddess governed by the divine Inhabitant who does the work.
\par It does not follow that the work is not to be done perfectly,
Page 179

with success, with a right adaptation of means to ends: on the contrary a
perfect working is easier to action done tranquilly in Yoga than to action done
in the blindness of hopes and fears, lamed by the judgments of the stumbling
reason, running about amidst the eager trepidations of the hasty human will:
Yoga, says the Gita elsewhere, is the true skill in works, \s{yoga\,h karmasu
kau\'salam}. But all this is done impersonally by the action of a great universal
light and power operating through the individual nature. The Karmayogin
knows that the power given to him will be adapted to the fruit decreed, the
divine thought behind the work equated with the work he has to do, the will in
him,—which will not be wish or desire, but an impersonal drive of conscious
power directed towards an aim not his own,—subtly regulated in its energy
and direction by the divine wisdom. The result may be success, as the
ordinary mind understands it, or it may seem to that mind to be defeat and
failure; but to him it is always the success intended, not by him, but by the
all-wise manipulator of action and result, because he does not seek for
victory, but only for the fulfilment of the divine will and wisdom which works
out its ends through apparent failure as well as and often with greater force
than through apparent triumph. Arjuna, bidden to fight, is assured of victory;
but even if certain defeat were before him, he must still fight because that is
the present work assigned to him as his immediate share in the great sum of
energies by which the divine will is surely accomplished.
\par The liberated man has no personal hopes; he does not seize on things as
his personal possessions; he receives what the divine Will brings him, covets
nothing, is jealous of none: what comes to him he takes without repulsion and
without attachment; what goes from him he allows to depart into the whirl of
things without repining or grief or sense of loss. His heart and self are under
perfect control; they are free from reaction and passion, they make no
turbulent response to the touches of outward things. His action is indeed a
purely physical action, \s{\'s\=ar\=ira\.m kevala\.m karma}; for all else comes from
above, is not generated on the human plane, is only a reflection of the will,
knowledge, joy of the divine Purushottama. Therefore he does not by a stress
on
Page 180

doing and its objects bring about in his mind and heart any of those reactions
which we call passion and sin. For sin consists not at all in the outward deed,
but in an impure reaction of the personal will, mind and heart which
accompanies it or causes it; the impersonal, the spiritual is always pure,
\s{ap\=apaviddham}, and gives to all that it does its own inalienable purity. This
spiritual impersonality is a third sign of the divine worker. All human souls,
indeed, who have attained to a certain greatness and largeness are conscious
of an impersonal Force or Love or Will and Knowledge working through
them, but they are not free from egoistic reactions, sometimes violent enough,
of their human personality. But this freedom the liberated soul has attained;
for he has cast his personality into the impersonal, where it is no longer his,
but is taken up by the divine Person, the Purushottama, who uses all finite
qualities infinitely and freely and is bound by none. He has become a soul and
ceased to be a sum of natural qualities; and such appearance of personality
as remains for the operations of Nature, is something unbound, large, flexible,
universal; it is a free mould for the Infinite, it is a living mask of the
Purushottama.
\par The result of this knowledge, this desirelessness and this impersonality is
a perfect equality in the soul and the nature. Equality is the fourth sign of the
divine worker. He has, says the Gita, passed beyond the dualities; he is
\s{dvandv\=at\=ita}. We have seen that he regards with equal eyes, without any
disturbance of feeling, failure and success, victory and defeat; but not only
these, all dualities are in him surpassed and reconciled. The outward
distinctions by which men determine their psychological attitude towards the
happenings of the world, have for him only a subordinate and instrumental
meaning. He does not ignore them, but he is above them. Good happening
and evil happening, so all-important to the human soul subject to desire, are to
the desireless divine soul equally welcome since by their mingled strand are
worked out the developing forms of the eternal good. He cannot be defeated,
since all for him is moving towards the divine victory in the Kurukshetra of
Nature, \s{dharmak\,setre kuruk\,setre}, the field of doings which is the field
Page 181

of the evolving Dharma, and every turn of the conflict has been designed and
mapped by the foreseeing eye of the Master of the battle, the Lord of works
and Guide of the dharma. Honour and dishonour from men cannot move him,
nor their praise nor their blame; for he has a greater clear-seeing judge and
another standard for his action, and his motive admits no dependence upon
worldly rewards. Arjuna the Kshatriya prizes naturally honour and reputation
and is right in shunning disgrace and the name of coward as worse than
death; for to maintain the point of honour and the standard of courage in the
world is part of his dharma: but Arjuna the liberated soul need care for none
of these things, he has only to know the \s{kartavya\.m karma}, the work
which the supreme Self demands from him, and to do that and leave the
result to the Lord of his actions. He has passed even beyond that distinction
of sin and virtue which is so all-important to the human soul while it is
struggling to minimise the hold of its egoism and lighten the heavy and violent
yoke of its passions,—the liberated has risen above these struggles and is
seated firmly in the purity of the witnessing and enlightened soul. Sin has
fallen away from him, and not a virtue acquired and increased by good action
and impaired or lost by evil action, but the inalienable and unalterable purity of
a divine and selfless nature is the peak to which he has climbed and the seat
upon which he is founded. There the sense of sin and the sense of virtue
have no starting-point or applicability.
\par Arjuna, still in the ignorance, may feel in his heart the call of right and
justice and may argue in his mind that abstention from battle would be a sin
entailing responsibility for all the suffering that injustice and oppression and
the evil karma of the triumph of wrong bring upon men and nations, or he
may feel in his heart the recoil from violence and slaughter and argue in his
mind that all shedding of blood is a sin which nothing can justify. Both of
these attitudes would appeal with equal right to virtue and reason and it would
depend upon the man, the circumstances and the time which of these might
prevail in his mind or before the eyes of the world. Or he might simply feel
constrained by his heart and his honour to support his friends against his
enemies,
Page 182

the cause of the good and just against the cause of the evil and oppressive.
The liberated soul looks beyond these conflicting standards; he sees simply
what the supreme Self demands from him as needful for the maintenance or
for the bringing forward of the evolving Dharma. He has no personal ends to
serve, no personal loves and hatreds to satisfy, no rigidly fixed standard of
action which opposes its rock-line to the flexible advancing march of the
progress of the human race or stands up defiant against the call of the
Infinite. He has no personal enemies to be conquered or slain, but sees only
men who have been brought up against him by circumstances and the will in
things to help by their opposition the march of destiny. Against them he can
have no wrath or hatred; for wrath and hatred are foreign to the divine
nature. The Asura's desire to break and slay what opposes him, the
Rakshasa's grim lust of slaughter are impossible to his calm and peace and
his all-embracing sympathy and understanding. He has no wish to injure, but
on the contrary a universal friendliness and compassion, \s{maitra\,h karu\,na
eva ca}: but this compassion is that of a divine soul overlooking men,
embracing all other souls in himself, not the shrinking of the heart and the
nerves and the flesh which is the ordinary human form of pity: nor does he
attach a supreme importance to the life of the body, but looks beyond to the
life of the soul and attaches to the other only an instrumental value. He will
not hasten to slaughter and strife, but if war comes in the wave of the
Dharma, he will accept it with a large equality and a perfect understanding
and sympathy for those whose power and pleasure of domination he has to
break and whose joy of triumphant life he has to destroy.
\par For in all he sees two things, the Divine inhabiting every being equally,
the varying manifestation unequal only in its temporary circumstances. In the
animal and man, in the dog, the unclean outcaste and the learned and virtuous
Brahmin, in the saint and the sinner, in the indifferent and the friendly and the
hostile, in those who love him and benefit and those who hate him and afflict,
he sees himself, he sees God and has at heart for all the same equal
kindliness, the same divine affection. Circumstances may determine the
outward clasp or the outward
Page 183

conflict, but can never affect his equal eye, his open heart, his inner embrace
of all. And in all his actions there will be the same principle of soul, a perfect
equality, and the same principle of work, the will of the Divine in him active
for the need of the race in its gradually developing advance towards the
Godhead.
\par Again, the sign of the divine worker is that which is central to the divine
consciousness itself, a perfect inner joy and peace which depends upon
nothing in the world for its source or its continuance; it is innate, it is the very
stuff of the soul's consciousness, it is the very nature of divine being. The
ordinary man depends upon outward things for his happiness; therefore he
has desire; therefore he has anger and passion, pleasure and pain, joy and
grief; therefore he measures all things in the balance of good fortune and evil
fortune. None of these things can affect the divine soul; it is ever satisfied
without any kind of dependence, \s{nitya-t\,rpto} \s{nir\=a\'sraya\,h}; for its delight,
its divine ease, its happiness, its glad light are eternal within, ingrained in itself,
\s{\=atma-rati\,h}, \s{anta\,h-sukho 'ntar-\=ar\=amas tath\=antar-jyotir} \s{eva ya\,h}.
What joy it takes in outward things is not for their sake, not for things which it
seeks in them and can miss, but for the self in them, for their expression of
the Divine, for that which is eternal in them and which it cannot miss. It is
without attachment to their outward touches, but finds everywhere the same
joy that it finds in itself, because its self is theirs, has become one self with
the self of all beings, because it is united with the one and equal Brahman in
them through all their differences, \s{brahmayoga-yukt\=atm\=a},
\s{sarvabh\=ut\=atma-bh\=ut\=atm\=a}. It does not rejoice in the touches of the
pleasant or feel anguish in the touches of the unpleasant; neither the wounds
of things, nor the wounds of friends, nor the wounds of enemies can disturb
the firmness of its outgazing mind or bewilder its receiving heart; this soul is
in its nature, as the Upanishad puts it, \s{avra\,nam}, without wound or scar.
In all things it has the same imperishable Ananda, \s{sukham ak\,sayam
a\'snute}.
\par That equality, impersonality, peace, joy, freedom do not depend on so
outward a thing as doing or not doing works. The Gita insists repeatedly on
the difference between the inward and
Page 184

the outward renunciation, \s{ty\=aga} and \s{sanny\=asa}. The latter, it says, is
valueless without the former, hardly possible even to attain without it, and
unnecessary when there is the inward freedom. In fact \s{ty\=aga} itself is the
real and sufficient Sannyasa. “He should be known as the eternal Sannyasin
who neither hates nor desires; free from the dualities he is happily and easily
released from all bondage.” The painful process of outward Sannyasa,
\s{du\,hkham \=aptum}, is an unnecessary process. It is perfectly true that all
actions, as well as the fruit of action, have to be given up, to be renounced,
but inwardly, not outwardly, not into the inertia of Nature, but to the Lord in
sacrifice, into the calm and joy of the Impersonal from whom all action
proceeds without disturbing his peace. The true Sannyasa of action is the
reposing of all works on the Brahman. “He who, having abandoned
attachment, acts reposing (or founding) his works on the Brahman,
\s{brahma\,ny\=adh\=aya karm\=a\,ni}, is not stained by sin even as water clings not
to the lotus-leaf.” Therefore the Yogins first “do works with the body, mind,
understanding, or even merely with the organs of action, abandoning
attachment, for self-purification, \s{sa\.nga\.m tyaktv\=atma\'suddhaye}. By
abandoning attachment to the fruits of works the soul in union with Brahman
attains to peace of rapt foundation in Brahman, but the soul not in union is
attached to the fruit and bound by the action of desire.” The foundation, the
purity, the peace once attained, the embodied soul perfectly controlling its
nature, having renounced all its actions by the mind, inwardly, not outwardly,
“sits in its nine-gated city neither doing nor causing to be done.” For this soul
is the one impersonal Soul in all, the all-pervading Lord, \s{prabhu},
\s{vibhu}, who, as the impersonal, neither creates the works of the world, nor
the mind's idea of being the doer, \s{na kart\,rtva\.m na karm\=a\,ni}, nor the
coupling of works to their fruits, the chain of cause and effect. All that is
worked out by the Nature in the man, \s{svabh\=ava}, his principle of
self-becoming, as the word literally means. The all-pervading Impersonal
accepts neither the sin nor the virtue of any: these are things created by the
ignorance in the creature, by his egoism of the doer, by his ignorance of his
highest self, by his involution in the operations of Nature, and
Page 185

when the self-knowledge within him is released from this dark envelope, that
knowledge lights up like a sun the real self within him; he knows himself then
to be the soul supreme above the instruments of Nature. Pure, infinite,
inviolable, immutable, he is no longer affected; no longer does he imagine
himself to be modified by her workings. By complete identification with the
Impersonal he can, too, release himself from the necessity of returning by
birth into her movement.
\par And yet this liberation does not at all prevent him from acting. Only, he
knows that it is not he who is active, but the modes, the qualities of Nature,
her triple \s{gu\,nas}. “The man who knows the principles of things thinks, his
mind in Yoga (with the inactive Impersonal), `I am doing nothing'; when he
sees, hears, touches, smells, eats, moves, sleeps, breathes, speaks, takes,
ejects, opens his eyes or closes them, he holds that it is only the senses acting
upon the objects of the senses.” He himself, safe in the immutable,
unmodified soul, is beyond the grip of the three gunas, \s{trigu\,n\=at\=ita}; he is
neither sattwic, rajasic nor tamasic; he sees with a clear untroubled spirit the
alternations of the natural modes and qualities in his action, their rhythmic
play of light and happiness, activity and force, rest and inertia. This
superiority of the calm soul observing its action but not involved in it, this
\s{traigu\,n\=at\=itya}, is also a high sign of the divine worker. By itself the idea
might lead to a doctrine of the mechanical determinism of Nature and the
perfect aloofness and irresponsibility of the soul; but the Gita effectively
avoids this fault of an insufficient thought by its illumining supertheistic idea of
the Purushottama. It makes it clear that it is not in the end Nature which
mechanically determines its own action; it is the will of the Supreme which
inspires her; he who has already slain the Dhritarashtrians, he of whom
Arjuna is only the human instrument, a universal Soul, a transcendent
Godhead is the master of her labour. The reposing of works in the
Impersonal is a means of getting rid of the personal egoism of the doer, but
the end is to give up all our actions to that great Lord of all,
\s{sarva-loka-mahe\'svara}. “With a consciousness identified with the Self,
renouncing all thy actions into Me, \s{mayi sarv\=a\,ni karm\=a\,ni}
Page 186

\s{sannyasy\=adhy\=atmacetas\=a}, freed from personal hopes and desires, from
the thought of `I' and `mine', delivered from the fever of the soul, fight,”
work, do my will in the world. The Divine motives, inspires, determines the
entire action; the human soul impersonal in the Brahman is the pure and silent
channel of his power; that power in the Nature executes the divine
movement. Such only are the works of the liberated soul, \s{muktasya
karma}, for in nothing does he act from a personal inception; such are the
actions of the accomplished Karmayogin. They rise from a free spirit and
disappear without modifying it, like waves that rise and disappear on the
surface of conscious, immutable depths. \s{Gata-sa\.ngasya muktasya
j\~n\=an\=avasthita-cetasa\,h, yaj\~n\=ay\=acarata\,h karma samagra\.m pravil\=iyate}.
Page 187

\par
\HN XIX
\par
\ht Equality
\par\drop Since knowledge, desirelessness, impersonality, equality, the inner
self-existent peace and bliss, freedom from or at least superiority to the
tangled interlocking of the three modes of Nature are the signs of the
liberated soul, they must accompany it in all its activities. They are the
condition of that unalterable calm which this soul preserves in all the
movement, all the shock, all the clash of forces which surround it in the
world. That calm reflects the equable immutability of the Brahman in the
midst of all mutations, and it belongs to the indivisible and impartial Oneness
which is for ever immanent in all the multiplicities of the universe. For an
equal and all-equalising spirit is that Oneness in the midst of the million
differences and inequalities of the world; and equality of the spirit is the sole
real equality. For in all else in existence there can only be similarity,
adjustment and balance; but even in the greatest similarities of the world we
find difference of inequality and difference of unlikeness and the adjusted
balancings of the world can only come about by a poising of combined
unequal weights.
\par Hence the immense importance attached by the Gita in its elements of
Karmayoga to equality; it is the nodus of the free spirit's free relations with
the world. Self-knowledge, desirelessness, impersonality, bliss, freedom from
the modes of Nature, when withdrawn into themselves, self-absorbed,
inactive, have no need of equality; for they take no cognisance of the things
in which the opposition of equality and inequality arises. But the moment the
spirit takes cognisance of and deals with the multiplicities, personalities,
differences, inequalities of the action of Nature, it has to effectuate these
other signs of its free status by this one manifesting sign of equality.
Knowledge is the consciousness of unity with the One; and in relation with
the many different beings and existences of the universe it must
Page 188

show itself by an equal oneness with all. Impersonality is the one immutable
spirit's superiority to the variations of its multiple personality in the world; in
its dealings with the personalities of the universe it must show itself in the
equal and impartial spirit of its action with regard to all, however various that
action may be made by the variety of relations into which it is moulded or of
the conditions under which it has to take place. So Krishna in the Gita says
that none is dear to him, none hated, to all he is equal in spirit; yet is the
God-lover the special receiver of his grace, because the relation he has
created is different and the one impartial Lord of all yet meets each soul
according to its way of approach to him. Desirelessness is the illimitable
Spirit's superiority to the limiting attraction of the separate objects of desire in
the world; when it has to enter into relations with those objects, it must show
it either by an equal and impartial indifference in their possession or by an
equal and impartial unattached delight in all and love for all which, because it
is self-existent, does not depend upon possession or non-possession, but is in
its essence unperturbed and immutable. For the spirit's bliss is in itself, and if
this bliss is to enter into relations with things and creatures, it is only in this
way that it can manifest its free spirituality. \s{Traigu\,n\=at\=itya}, transcendence
of the gunas, is the unperturbed spirit's superiority to that flux of action of the
modes of Nature which is in its constant character perturbed and unequal; if
it has to enter into relations with the conflicting and unequal activities of
Nature, if the free soul is to allow its nature any action at all, it must show its
superiority by an impartial equality towards all activities, results or
happenings.
\par Equality is the sign and also for the aspirant the test. Where there is
inequality in the soul, there there is in evidence some unequal play of the
modes of Nature, motion of desire, play of personal will, feeling and action,
activity of joy and grief or that disturbed and disturbing delight which is not
true spiritual bliss but a mental satisfaction bringing in its train inevitably a
counterpart or recoil of mental dissatisfaction. Where there is inequality of
soul, there there is deviation from knowledge, loss of steadfast abiding in the
all-embracing and all-reconciling
Page 189

oneness of the Brahman and unity of things. By his equality the Karmayogin
knows in the midst of his action that he is free.
\par It is the spiritual nature of the equality enjoined, high and universal in its
character and comprehension, which gives its distinctive note to the teaching
of the Gita in this matter. For otherwise the mere teaching of equality in itself
as the most desirable status of the mind, feelings and temperament in which
we rise superior to human weakness, is by no means peculiar to the Gita.
Equality has always been held up to admiration as the philosophic ideal and
the characteristic temperament of the sages. The Gita takes up indeed this
philosophic ideal, but carries it far beyond into a higher region where we find
ourselves breathing a larger and purer air. The Stoic poise, the philosophic
poise of the soul are only its first and second steps of ascension out of the
whirl of the passions and the tossings of desire to a serenity and bliss, not of
the Gods, but of the Divine himself in his supreme self-mastery. The Stoic
equality, making character its pivot, founds itself upon self-mastery by
austere endurance; the happier and serener philosophic equality prefers
self-mastery by knowledge, by detachment, by a high intellectual indifference
seated above the disturbances to which our nature is prone, \s{ud\=as\=inavad
\=as\=ina\,h}, as the Gita expresses it; there is also the religious or Christian
equality which is a perpetual kneeling or a prostrate resignation and
submission to the will of God. These are the three steps and means towards
divine peace, heroic endurance, sage indifference, pious resignation,
\s{titik\,s\=a}, \s{ud\=as\=inat\=a}, \s{namas} or \s{nati}. The Gita takes them all in its
large synthetic manner and weaves them into its upward soul-movement, but
it gives to each a profounder root, a larger outlook, a more universal and
transcendent significance. For to each it gives the values of the spirit, its
power of spiritual being beyond the strain of character, beyond the difficult
poise of the understanding, beyond the stress of the emotions.
\par The ordinary human soul takes a pleasure in the customary disturbances
of its nature-life; it is because it has this pleasure and because, having it, it
gives a sanction to the troubled play of the lower nature that the play
continues perpetually; for the
Page 190

Prakriti does nothing except for the pleasure and with the sanction of its lover
and enjoyer, the Purusha. We do not recognise this truth because under the
actual stroke of the adverse disturbance, smitten by grief, pain, discomfort,
misfortune, failure, defeat, blame, dishonour, the mind shrinks back from the
blow, while it leaps eagerly to the embrace of the opposite and pleasurable
disturbances, joy, pleasure, satisfactions of all kinds, prosperity, success,
victory, glory, praise; but this does not alter the truth of the soul's pleasure in
life which remains constant behind the dualities of the mind. The warrior does
not feel physical pleasure in his wounds or find mental satisfaction in his
defeats; but he has a complete delight in the godhead of battle which brings
to him defeat and wounds as well as the joy of victory, and he accepts the
chances of the former and the hope of the latter as part of the mingled weft
of war, the thing which the delight in him pursues. Even, wounds bring him a
joy and pride in memory, complete when the pain of them has passed, but
often enough present even while it is there and actually fed by the pain.
Defeat keeps for him the joy and pride of indomitable resistance to a superior
adversary, or, if he is of a baser kind, the passions of hatred and revenge
which also have their darker and crueller pleasures. So it is with the pleasure
of the soul in the normal play of our life.
\par The mind recoils by pain and dislike from the adverse strokes of life; that
is Nature's device for enforcing a principle of self-protection, \s{jugups\=a}, so
that the vulnerable nervous and bodily parts of us may not unduly rush upon
self-destruction to embrace it: it takes joy in the favourable touches of life;
that is Nature's lure of rajasic pleasure, so that the force in the creature may
overcome the tamasic tendencies of inertia and inactivity and be impelled
fully towards action, desire, struggle, success, and by its attachment to these
things her ends may be worked out. Our secret soul takes a pleasure in this
strife and effort, and even a pleasure in adversity and suffering, which can be
complete enough in memory and retrospect, but is present too behind at the
time and often even rises to the surface of the afflicted mind to support it in
its passion; but what really
Page 191

attracts the soul is the whole mingled weft of the thing we call life with all its
disturbance of struggle and seeking, its attractions and repulsions, its offer
and its menace, its varieties of every kind. To the rajasic desire-soul in us a
monotonous pleasure, success without struggle, joy without a shadow must
after a time become fatiguing, insipid, cloying; it needs a background of
darkness to give full value to its enjoyment of light: for the happiness it seeks
and enjoys is of that very nature, it is in its very essence relative and
dependent on the perception and experience of its opposite. The joy of the
soul in the dualities is the secret of the mind's pleasure in living.
\par Ask it to rise out of all this disturbance to the unmingled joy of the pure
bliss-soul which all the time secretly supports its strength in the struggle and
makes its own continued existence possible,—it will draw back at once from
the call. It does not believe in such an existence; or it believes that it would
not be life, that it would not be at all the varied existence in the world around
it in which it is accustomed to take pleasure; it would be something tasteless
and without savour. Or it feels that the effort would be too difficult for it; it
recoils from the struggle of the ascent, although in reality the spiritual change
is not at all more difficult than the realisation of the dreams the desire-soul
pursues, nor entails more struggle and labour in the attainment than the
tremendous effort which the desire-soul expends in its passionate chase after
its own transient objects of pleasure and desire. The true cause of its
unwillingness is that it is asked to rise above its own atmosphere and breathe
a rarer and purer air of life, whose bliss and power it cannot realise and
hardly even conceives as real, while the joy of this lower turbid nature is to it
the one thing familiar and palpable. Nor is this lower satisfaction in itself a
thing evil and unprofitable; it is rather the condition for the upward evolution
of our human nature out of the tamasic ignorance and inertia to which its
material being is most subject; it is the rajasic stage of the graded ascent of
man towards the supreme self-knowledge, power and bliss. But if we rest
eternally on this plane, the \s{madhyam\=a gati\,h} of the Gita, our ascent
remains unfinished, the evolution of the soul incomplete.
Page 192

Through the sattwic being and nature to that which is beyond the three gunas
lies the way of the soul to its perfection.
\par The movement which will lead us out of the disturbances of the lower
nature must be necessarily a movement towards equality in the mind, in the
emotional temperament, in the soul. But it is to be noted that, although in the
end we must arrive at a superiority to all the three gunas of the lower nature,
it is yet in its incipience by a resort to one or other of the three that the
movement must begin. The beginning of equality may be sattwic, rajasic or
tamasic; for there is a possibility in the human nature of a tamasic equality. It
may be purely tamasic, the heavy equability of a vital temperament rendered
inertly irresponsive to the shocks of existence by a sort of dull insensibility
undesirous of the joy of life. Or it may result from a weariness of the
emotions and desires accumulated by a surfeit and satiety of the pleasure or
else, on the contrary, a disappointment and a disgust and shrinking from the
pain of life, a lassitude, a fear and horror and dislike of the world: it is then in
its nature a mixed movement, rajaso-tamasic, but the lower quality
predominates. Or, approaching the sattwic principle, it may aid itself by the
intellectual perception that the desires of life cannot be satisfied, that the soul
is too weak to master life, that the whole thing is nothing but sorrow and
transient effort and nowhere in it is there any real truth or sanity or light or
happiness; this is the sattwo-tamasic principle of equality and is not so much
equality, though it may lead to that, as indifference or equal refusal.
Essentially, the movement of tamasic equality is a generalisation of Nature's
principle of \s{jugups\=a} or self-protecting recoil extended from the shunning
of particular painful effects to a shunning of the whole life of Nature itself as
in sum leading to pain and self-tormenting and not to the delight which the
soul demands.
\par In tamasic equality by itself there is no real liberation; but it can be made
a powerful starting-point, if, as in Indian asceticism, it is turned into the
sattwic by the perception of the greater existence, the truer power, the higher
delight of the immutable Self above Nature. The natural turn of such a
movement, however, is towards Sannyasa, the renunciation of life and works,
rather
Page 193

than to that union of inner renunciation of desire with continued activity in the
world of Nature which the Gita advocates. The Gita, however, admits and
makes room for this movement; it allows as a recoiling starting-point the
perception of the defects of the world-existence, birth and disease and death
and old age and sorrow, the historic starting-point of the Buddha,
\s{janma-m\,rtyu-jar\=a-vy\=adhi-du\,hkha-do\,s\=anudar\'sanam}, and it accepts the
effort of those whose self-discipline is motived by a desire for release, even
in this spirit, from the curse of age and death, \s{jar\=a-mara\,na-mok\,s\=aya m\=am
\=a\'sritya yatanti ye}. But that, to be of any profit, must be accompanied by the
sattwic perception of a higher state and the taking delight and refuge in the
existence of the Divine, \s{m\=am \=a\'sritya}. Then the soul by its recoil comes to
a greater condition of being, lifted beyond the three gunas and free from birth
and death and age and grief, and enjoys the immortality of its self-existence,
\s{janma-m\,rtyu-jar\=a-du\,hkhair} \s{vimukto 'm\,rtam} \s{a\'snute}. The tamasic
unwillingness to accept the pain and effort of life is indeed by itself a
weakening and degrading thing, and in this lies the danger of preaching to all
alike the gospel of asceticism and world-disgust, that it puts the stamp of a
tamasic weakness and shrinking on unfit souls, confuses their understanding,
\s{buddhibheda\.m} \s{janayet}, diminishes the sustained aspiration, the
confidence in living, the power of effort which the soul of man needs for its
salutary, its necessary rajasic struggle to master its environment, without
really opening to it—for it is yet incapable of that—a higher goal, a greater
endeavour, a mightier victory. But in souls that are fit this tamasic recoil may
serve a useful spiritual purpose by slaying their rajasic attraction, their eager
preoccupation with the lower life which prevents the sattwic awakening to a
higher possibility. Seeking then for a refuge in the void they have created,
they are able to hear the divine call, “O soul that findest thyself in this
transient and unhappy world, turn and put thy delight in Me,” \s{anityam
asukha\.m} \s{lokam ima\.m} \s{pr\=apya bhajasva m\=am}.
\par Still, in this movement, the equality consists only in an equal recoil from
all that constitutes the world; and it arrives at indifference and aloofness, but
does not include that power to
Page 194

accept equally all the touches of the world pleasurable or painful without
attachment or disturbance which is a necessary element in the discipline of
the Gita. Therefore, even if we begin with the tamasic recoil,—which is not
at all necessary,—it can only be as a first incitement to a greater endeavour,
not as a permanent pessimism. The real discipline begins with the movement
to mastery over these things from which we were first inclined merely to
flee. It is here that the possibility of a kind of rajasic equality comes in, which
is at its lowest the strong nature's pride in self-mastery, self-control,
superiority to passion and weakness; but the Stoic ideal seizes upon this point
of departure and makes it the key to an entire liberation of the soul from
subjection to all weakness of its lower nature. As the tamasic inward recoil is
a generalisation of Nature's principle of \s{jugups\=a} or self-protection from
suffering, so the rajasic upward movement is a generalisation of Nature's
other principle of the acceptance of struggle and effort and the innate impulse
of life towards mastery and victory; but it transfers the battle to the field
where alone complete victory is possible. Instead of a struggle for scattered
outward aims and transient successes, it proposes nothing less than the
conquest of Nature and the world itself by a spiritual struggle and an inner
victory. The tamasic recoil turns from both the pains and pleasures of the
world to flee from them; the rajasic movement turns upon them to bear,
master and rise superior to them. The Stoic self-discipline calls desire and
passion into its embrace of the wrestler and crushes them between its arms,
as did old Dhritarashtra in the epic the iron image of Bhima. It endures the
shock of things painful and pleasurable, the causes of the physical and mental
affections of the nature, and breaks their effects to pieces; it is complete
when the soul can bear all touches without being pained or attracted, excited
or troubled. It seeks to make man the conqueror and king of his nature.
\par The Gita, making its call on the warrior nature of Arjuna, starts with this
heroic movement. It calls on him to turn on the great enemy desire and slay
it. Its first description of equality is that of the Stoic philosopher. “He whose
mind is undisturbed in the midst of sorrows and amid pleasures is free from
desire, from
Page 195

whom liking and fear and wrath have passed away, is the sage of settled
understanding. Who in all things is without affection though visited by this
good or that evil and neither hates nor rejoices, his intelligence sits firmly
founded in wisdom.” If one abstains from food, it says, giving a physical
example, the object of sense ceases to affect, but the affection itself of the
sense, the \s{rasa}, remains; it is only when, even in the exercise of the
sense, it can keep back from seeking its sensuous aim in the object, \s{artha},
and abandon the affection, the desire for the pleasure of taste, that the
highest level of the soul is reached. It is by using the mental organs on the
objects, “ranging over them with the senses,” \s{vi\,say\=an indriyai\'s caran}, but
with senses subject to the self, freed from liking and disliking, that one gets
into a large and sweet clearness of soul and temperament in which passion
and grief find no place. All desires have to enter into the soul, as waters into
the sea, and yet it has to remain immovable, filled but not disturbed: so in the
end all desires can be abandoned. To be freed from wrath and passion and
fear and attraction is repeatedly stressed as a necessary condition of the
liberated status, and for this we must learn to bear their shocks, which cannot
be done without exposing ourselves to their causes. “He who can bear here
in the body the velocity of wrath and desire, is the Yogin, the happy man.”
\s{Titik\,s\=a}, the will and power to endure, is the means. “The material touches
which cause heat and cold, happiness and pain, things transient which come
and go, these learn to endure. For the man whom these do not trouble nor
pain, the firm and wise who is equal in pleasure and suffering, makes himself
apt for immortality.” The equal-souled has to bear suffering and not hate, to
receive pleasure and not rejoice. Even the physical affections are to be
mastered by endurance and this too is part of the Stoic discipline. Age, death,
suffering, pain are not fled from, but accepted and vanquished by a high
indifference.
\note{\s{Dh\=iras tatra na muhyati}, says the Gita; the strong and wise soul is
not perplexed, troubled or moved by them. But still they are accepted only to
be conquered, \s{jar\=a-mara\,na-mok\,s\=aya yatanti}.} Not to flee appalled from
Nature in her
Page 196

lower masks, but to meet and conquer her is the true instinct of the strong
nature, \s{puru\,sar\,sabha}, the leonine soul among men. Thus compelled, she
throws aside her mask and reveals to him his true nature as the free soul, not
her subject but her king and lord, \s{svar\=a\,t}, \s{samr\=a\,t}.
\par But the Gita accepts this Stoic discipline, this heroic philosophy, on the
same condition that it accepts the tamasic recoil,—it must have above it the
sattwic vision of knowledge, at its root the aim at self-realisation and in its
steps the ascent to the divine Nature. A Stoic discipline which merely
crushed down the common affections of our human nature,—although less
dangerous than a tamasic weariness of life, unfruitful pessimism and sterile
inertia, because it would at least increase the power and self-mastery of the
soul,—would still be no unmixed good, since it might lead to insensibility and
an inhuman isolation without giving the true spiritual release. The Stoic
equality is justified as an element in the discipline of the Gita because it can
be associated with and can help to the realisation of the free immutable Self
in the mobile human being, \s{para\.m d\,r\,s\,tv\=a}, and to status in that new
self-consciousness, \s{e\,s\=a br\=ahm\=i sthiti\,h}. “Awakening by the understanding
to the Highest which is beyond even the discerning mind, put force on the self
by the self to make it firm and still, and slay this enemy who is so hard to
assail, Desire.” Both the tamasic recoil of escape and the rajasic movement
of struggle and victory are only justified when they look beyond themselves
through the sattwic principle to the self-knowledge which legitimises both the
recoil and the struggle.
\par The pure philosopher, the thinker, the born sage not only relies upon the
sattwic principle in him as his ultimate justification, but uses it from the
beginning as his instrument of self-mastery. He starts from the sattwic
equality. He too observes the transitoriness of the material and external world
and its failure to satisfy the desires or to give the true delight, but this causes
in him no grief, fear or disappointment. He observes all with an eye of
tranquil discernment and makes his choice without repulsion or perplexity.
“The enjoyments born of the touches of things are
Page 197

causes of sorrow, they have a beginning and an end; therefore the sage, the
man of awakened understanding, \s{budha\,h}, does not place his delight in
these.” “The self in him is unattached to the touches of external things; he
finds his happiness in himself.” He sees, as the Gita puts it, that he is himself
his own enemy and his own friend, and therefore he takes care not to
dethrone himself by casting his being into the hands of desire and passion,
\s{n\=atm\=anam avas\=adayet}, but delivers himself out of that imprisonment by
his own inner power, \s{uddhared \=atman\=atm\=anam}; for whoever has
conquered his lower self, finds in his higher self his best friend and ally. He
becomes satisfied with knowledge, master of his senses, a Yogin by sattwic
equality,—for equality is Yoga, \s{samatva\.m yoga ucyate},—regarding alike
clod and stone and gold, tranquil and self-poised in heat and cold, suffering
and happiness, honour and disgrace. He is equal in soul to friend and enemy
and to neutral and indifferent, because he sees that these are transitory
relations born of the changing conditions of life. Even by the pretensions of
learning and purity and virtue and the claims to superiority which men base
upon these things, he is not led away. He is equal-souled to all men, to the
sinner and the saint, to the virtuous, learned and cultured Brahmin and the
fallen outcaste. All these are the Gita's descriptions of the sattwic equality,
and they sum up well enough what is familiar to the world as the calm
philosophic equality of the sage.
\par Where then is the difference between this and the larger equality taught
by the Gita? It lies in the difference between the intellectual and philosophic
discernment and the spiritual, the Vedantic knowledge of unity on which the
Gita founds its teaching. The philosopher maintains his equality by the power
of the buddhi, the discerning mind; but even that by itself is a doubtful
foundation. For, though master of himself on the whole by a constant
attention or an acquired habit of mind, in reality he is not free from his lower
nature, and it does actually assert itself in many ways and may at any
moment take a violent revenge for its rejection and suppression. For, always,
the play of the lower nature is a triple play, and the rajasic and tamasic
qualities are ever lying in wait for the sattwic man. “Even the mind of the
Page 198

wise man who labours for perfection is carried away by the vehement
insistence of the senses.” Perfect security can only be had by resorting to
something higher than the sattwic quality, something higher than the
discerning mind, to the Self,—not the philosopher's intelligent self, but the
divine sage's spiritual self which is beyond the three gunas. All must be
consummated by a divine birth into the higher spiritual nature.
\par And the philosopher's equality is like the Stoic's, like the world-fleeing
ascetic's, inwardly a lonely freedom, remote and aloof from men; but the man
born to the divine birth has found the Divine not only in himself, but in all
beings. He has realised his unity with all and his equality is therefore full of
sympathy and oneness. He sees all as himself and is not intent on his lonely
salvation; he even takes upon himself the burden of their happiness and
sorrow by which he is not himself affected or subjected. The perfect sage,
the Gita more than once repeats, is ever engaged with a large equality in
doing good to all creatures and makes that his occupation and delight,
\s{sarvabh\=utahite} \s{rata\,h}. The perfect Yogin is no solitary musing on the
Self in his ivory tower of spiritual isolation, but \s{yukta\,h}
\s{k\,rtsna}\s{-karma-k\,rt}, a many-sided universal worker for the good of the
world, for God in the world. For he is a \s{bhakta}, a lover and devotee of
the Divine, as well as a sage and a Yogin, a lover who loves God wherever
he finds Him and who finds Him everywhere; and what he loves, he does not
disdain to serve, nor does action carry him away from the bliss of union, since
all his acts proceed from the One in him and to the One in all they are
directed. The equality of the Gita is a large synthetic equality in which all is
lifted up into the integrality of the divine being and the divine nature.
Page 199

\par
\HN XX
\par
\ht Equality and Knowledge
\par\drop Yoga and knowledge are, in this early part of the Gita's teaching,
the two wings of the soul's ascent. By Yoga is meant union through divine
works done without desire, with equality of soul to all things and all men, as a
sacrifice to the Supreme, while knowledge is that on which this
desirelessness, this equality, this power of sacrifice is founded. The two
wings indeed assist each other's flight; acting together, yet with a subtle
alternation of mutual aid, like the two eyes in a man which see together
because they see alternately, they increase one another mutually by
interchange of substance. As the works grow more and more desireless,
equal-minded, sacrificial in spirit, the knowledge increases; with the increase
of the knowledge the soul becomes firmer in the desireless, sacrificial
equality of its works. The sacrifice of knowledge, says the Gita therefore, is
greater than any material sacrifice. “Even if thou art the greatest doer of sin
beyond all sinners, thou shalt cross over all the crookedness of evil in the ship
of knowledge.\sdots . . .  There is nothing in the world equal in purity to
knowledge.” By knowledge desire and its first-born child, sin, are destroyed.
The liberated man is able to do works as a sacrifice because he is freed from
attachment through his mind, heart and spirit being firmly founded in
self-knowledge, \s{gata-sa\.ngasya} \s{j\~n\=an\=avasthita-cetasa\,h}. All his work
disappears completely as soon as done, suffers \s{laya}, as one might say, in
the being of the Brahman, \s{pravil\=iyate}; it has no reactionary consequence
on the soul of the apparent doer. The work is done by the Lord through his
Nature, it is no longer personal to the human instrument. The work itself
becomes but power of the nature and substance of the being of the Brahman.
\par It is in this sense that the Gita is speaking when it says that all the totality
of work finds its completion, culmination, end in knowledge, \s{sarva\.m
karm\=akhila\.m j\~n\=ane parisam\=apyate}. “As
Page 200

a fire kindled turns to ashes its fuel, so the fire of knowledge turns all works
to ashes.” By this it is not at all meant that when knowledge is complete,
there is cessation from works. What is meant is made clear by the Gita when
it says that he who has destroyed all doubt by knowledge and has by Yoga
given up all works and is in possession of the Self is not bound by his works,
\s{yoga-sannyasta-karm\=a\,nam \=atmavanta\.m na karm\=a\,ni nibadhnanti}, and that
he whose self has become the self of all existences, acts and yet is not
affected by his works, is not caught in them, receives from them no
soul-ensnaring reaction, \s{kurvann api} \s{na lipyate}. Therefore, it says, the
Yoga of works is better than the physical renunciation of works, because,
while Sannyasa is difficult for embodied beings who must do works so long
as they are in the body, Yoga of works is entirely sufficient and it rapidly and
easily brings the soul to Brahman. That Yoga of works is, we have seen, the
offering of all action to the Lord, which induces as its culmination an inner
and not an outer, a spiritual, not a physical giving up of works into the
Brahman, into the being of the Lord, \s{brahma\,ni \=adh\=aya karm\=a\,ni}, \s{mayi
sannyasya}. When works are thus “reposed on the Brahman,” the
personality of the instrumental doer ceases; though he acts, he does nothing;
for he has given up not only the fruits of his works, but the works themselves
and the doing of them to the Lord. The Divine then takes the burden of
works from him; the Supreme becomes the doer and the act and the result.
\par This knowledge of which the Gita speaks, is not an intellectual activity of
the mind; it is a luminous growth into the highest state of being by the
outshining of the light of the divine sun of Truth, “that Truth, the Sun lying
concealed in the darkness” of our ignorance of which the Rigveda speaks,
\s{tat satya\.m s\=urya\.m tamasi k\,siyantam}. The immutable Brahman is there in
the spirit's skies above this troubled lower nature of the dualities, untouched
either by its virtue or by its sin, accepting neither our sense of sin nor our
self-righteousness, untouched by its joy and its sorrow, indifferent to our joy
in success and our grief in failure, master of all, supreme, all-pervading,
\s{prabhu vibhu}, calm, strong, pure, equal in all things, the source of Nature,
Page 201

not the direct doer of our works, but the witness of Nature and her works,
not imposing on us either the illusion of being the doer, for that illusion is the
result of the ignorance of this lower Nature. But this freedom, mastery, purity
we cannot see; we are bewildered by the natural ignorance which hides from
us the eternal self-knowledge of the Brahman secret within our being. But
knowledge comes to its persistent seeker and removes the natural
self-ignorance; it shines out like a long-hidden sun and lights up to our vision
that self-being supreme beyond the dualities of this lower existence,
\s{\=adityavat prak\=a\'sayati tat param}. By a long whole-hearted endeavour, by
directing our whole conscious being to that, by making that our whole aim, by
turning it into the whole object of our discerning mind and so seeing it not only
in ourselves but everywhere, we become one thought and self with that,
\s{tad-buddhayas tad-\=atm\=ana\,h}, we are washed clean of all the darkness and
suffering of the lower man by the waters of knowledge,
\note{The Rigveda so speaks of the streams of the Truth, the waters that
have perfect knowledge, the waters that are full of the divine sunlight,
\s{\,rtasya dh\=ar\=a\,h}, \s{\=apo vicetasa\,h}, \s{svarvat\=ir apa\,h}. What are here
metaphors, are there concrete symbols.} \s{j\~n\=ana-nirdh\=uta-kalma\,s\=a\,h}.
\par The result is, says the Gita, a perfect equality to all things and all
persons; and then only can we repose our works completely in the Brahman.
For the Brahman is equal, \s{sama\.m brahma}, and it is only when we have
this perfect equality, \s{s\=amye sthita\.m mana\,h}, “seeing with an equal eye the
learned and cultured Brahmin, the cow, the elephant, the dog, the outcaste”
and knowing all as one Brahman, that we can, living in that oneness, see like
the Brahman our works proceeding from the nature freely without any fear
of attachment, sin or bondage. Sin and stain then cannot be; for we have
overcome that creation full of desire and its works and reactions which
belongs to the ignorance, \s{tair jita\,h sarga\,h}, and living in the supreme and
divine Nature there is no longer fault or defect in our works; for these are
created by the inequalities of the ignorance. The equal Brahman is faultless,
\s{nirdo\,sa\.m hi sama\.m brahma}, beyond the confusion of good and evil, and
living in the Brahman we
Page 202

too rise beyond good and evil; we act in that purity, stainlessly, with an equal
and single purpose of fulfilling the welfare of all existences,
\s{k\,s\=i\,na-kalma\,s\=a\,h sarvabh\=uta-hite rat\=a\,h}. The Lord in our hearts is in the
ignorance also the cause of our actions, but through his Maya, through the
egoism of our lower nature which creates the tangled web of our actions and
brings back upon our egoism the recoil of their tangled reactions affecting us
inwardly as sin and virtue, affecting us outwardly as suffering and pleasure,
evil fortune and good fortune, the great chain of Karma. When we are freed
by knowledge, the Lord, no longer hidden in our hearts, but manifest as our
supreme self, takes up our works and uses us as faultless instruments,
\s{nimitta-m\=atram}, for the helping of the world. Such is the intimate union
between knowledge and equality; knowledge here in the \s{buddhi} reflected
as equality in the temperament; above, on a higher plane of consciousness,
knowledge as the light of the Being, equality as the stuff of the Nature.
\par Always in this sense of a supreme self-knowledge is this word \s{j\~n\=ana}
used in Indian philosophy and Yoga; it is the light by which we grow into our
true being, not the knowledge by which we increase our information and our
intellectual riches; it is not scientific or psychological or philosophic or ethical
or aesthetic or worldly and practical knowledge. These too no doubt help us
to grow, but only in the becoming, not in the being; they enter into the
definition of Yogic knowledge only when we use them as aids to know the
Supreme, the Self, the Divine,—scientific knowledge, when we can get
through the veil of processes and phenomena and see the one Reality behind
which explains them all; psychological knowledge, when we use it to know
ourselves and to distinguish the lower from the higher, so that this we may
renounce and into that we may grow; philosophical knowledge, when we turn
it as a light upon the essential principles of existence so as to discover and
live in that which is eternal; ethical knowledge, when by it having
distinguished sin from virtue we put away the one and rise above the other
into the pure innocence of the divine Nature; aesthetic knowledge, when we
discover by it the beauty of the Divine;
Page 203

knowledge of the world, when we see through it the way of the Lord with his
creatures and use it for the service of the Divine in man. Even then they are
only aids; the real knowledge is that which is a secret to the mind, of which
the mind only gets reflections, but which lives in the spirit.
\par The Gita in describing how we come by this knowledge, says that we get
first initiation into it from the men of knowledge who have {\it seen}, not
those who know merely by the intellect, its essential truths; but the actuality
of it comes from within ourselves: “the man who is perfected by Yoga, finds
it of himself in the self by the course of Time,” it grows within him, that is to
say, and he grows into it as he goes on increasing in desirelessness, in
equality, in devotion to the Divine. It is only of the supreme knowledge that
this can altogether be said; the knowledge which the intellect of man
amasses, is gathered laboriously by the senses and the reason from outside.
To get this other knowledge, self-existent, intuitive, self-experiencing,
self-revealing, we must have conquered and controlled our mind and senses,
\s{sa\.myatendriya\,h}, so that we are no longer subject to their delusions, but
rather the mind and senses become its pure mirror; we must have fixed our
whole conscious being on the truth of that supreme reality in which all exists,
\s{tat-para\,h}, so that it may display in us its luminous self-existence.
\par Finally, we must have a faith which no intellectual doubt can be allowed
to disturb, \s{\'sraddh\=av\=an labhate j\~n\=anam}. “The ignorant who has not faith,
the soul of doubt goeth to perdition; neither this world, nor the supreme world,
nor any happiness is for the soul full of doubts.” In fact, it is true that without
faith nothing decisive can be achieved either in this world or for possession of
the world above, and that it is only by laying hold of some sure basis and
positive support that man can attain any measure of terrestrial or celestial
success and satisfaction and happiness; the merely sceptical mind loses itself
in the void. But still in the lower knowledge doubt and scepticism have their
temporary uses; in the higher they are stumbling-blocks: for there the whole
secret is not the balancing of truth and error, but a constantly progressing
realisation of revealed truth. In
Page 204

intellectual knowledge there is always a mixture of falsehood or
incompleteness which has to be got rid of by subjecting the truth itself to
sceptical inquiry; but in the higher knowledge falsehood cannot enter and that
which intellect contributes by attaching itself to this or that opinion, cannot be
got rid of by mere questioning, but will fall away of itself by persistence in
realisation. Whatever incompleteness there is in the knowledge attained, it
must be got rid of, not by questioning in its roots what has already been
realised, but by proceeding to further and more complete realisation through a
deeper, higher and wider living in the Spirit. And what is not yet realised must
be prepared for by faith, not by sceptical questioning, because this truth is one
which the intellect cannot give and which is indeed often quite opposed to the
ideas in which the reasoning and logical mind gets entangled: it is not a truth
which has to be proved, but a truth which has to be lived inwardly, a greater
reality into which we have to grow. Finally, it is in itself a self-existent truth
and would be self-evident if it were not for the sorceries of the ignorance in
which we live; the doubts, the perplexities which prevent us from accepting
and following it, arise from that ignorance, from the sense-bewildered,
opinion-perplexed heart and mind, living as they do in a lower and
phenomenal truth and therefore questioning the higher realities,
\s{aj\~n\=ana-sambh\=uta\.m} \s{h\,rtstha\.m sa\.m\'sayam}. They have to be cut away
by the sword of knowledge, says the Gita, by the knowledge that realises, by
resorting constantly to Yoga, that is, by living out the union with the Supreme
whose truth being known all is known, \s{yasmin vij\~n\=ate sarva\.m vij\~n\=atam}.
\par The higher knowledge we then get is that which is to the knower of
Brahman his constant vision of things when he lives uninterruptedly in the
Brahman, \s{brahmavid brahma\,ni sthita\,h}. That is not a vision or knowledge
or consciousness of Brahman to the exclusion of all else, but a seeing of all in
Brahman and as the Self. For, it is said, the knowledge by which we rise
beyond all relapse back into the bewilderment of our mental nature, is “that
by which thou shalt see all existences without exception in the Self, then in
Me.” Elsewhere the Gita puts it more largely,
Page 205

“Equal-visioned everywhere, he sees the Self in all existences and all
existences in the Self. He who sees Me everywhere and all and each in Me,
is never lost to Me nor I to him. He who has reached oneness and loves Me
in all beings, that Yogin, howsoever he lives and acts, is living and acting in
Me. O Arjuna, he who sees all equally everywhere as himself, whether it be
happiness or suffering, I hold him to be the supreme Yogin.” That is the old
Vedantic knowledge of the Upanishads which the Gita holds up constantly
before us; but it is its superiority to other later formulations of it that it turns
persistently this knowledge into a great practical philosophy of divine living.
Always it insists on the relation between this knowledge of oneness and
Karmayoga, and therefore on the knowledge of oneness as the basis of a
liberated action in the world. Whenever it speaks of knowledge, it turns at
once to speak of equality which is its result; whenever it speaks of equality, it
turns to speak too of the knowledge which is its basis. The equality it enjoins
does not begin and end in a static condition of the soul useful only for
self-liberation; it is always a basis of works. The peace of the Brahman in the
liberated soul is the foundation; the large, free, equal, world-wide action of
the Lord in the liberated nature radiates the power which proceeds from that
peace; these two made one synthesise divine works and God-knowledge.
\par We see at once what a profound extension we get here for the ideas
which otherwise the Gita has in common with other systems of philosophic,
ethical or religious living. Endurance, philosophic indifference, resignation are,
we have said, the foundation of three kinds of equality; but the Gita's truth of
knowledge not only gathers them all up together, but gives them an infinitely
profound, a magnificently ample significance. The Stoic knowledge is that of
the soul's power of self-mastery by fortitude, an equality attained by a
struggle with one's nature, maintained by a constant vigilance and control
against its natural rebellions: it gives a noble peace, an austere happiness, but
not the supreme joy of the liberated self living not by a rule, but in the pure,
easy, spontaneous perfection of its divine being, so that “however it may act
and live, it acts and lives
Page 206

in the Divine,” because here perfection is not only attained but possessed in
its own right and has no longer to be maintained by effort, for it has become
the very nature of the soul's being. The Gita accepts the endurance and
fortitude of our struggle with the lower nature as a preliminary movement;
but if a certain mastery comes by our individual strength, the freedom of
mastery only comes by our union with God, by a merging or dwelling of the
personality in the one divine Person and the loss of the personal will in the
divine Will. There is a divine Master of Nature and her works, above her
though inhabiting her, who is our highest being and our universal self; to be
one with him is to make ourselves divine. By union with God we enter into a
supreme freedom and a supreme mastery. The ideal of the Stoic, the sage
who is king because by self-rule he becomes master also of outward
conditions, resembles superficially the Vedantic idea of the self-ruler and
all-ruler, \s{svar\=a\,t} \s{samr\=a\,t}; but it is on a lower plane. The Stoic kingship
is maintained by a force put upon self and environment; the entirely liberated
kingship of the Yogin exists naturally by the eternal royalty of the divine
nature, a union with its unfettered universality, a finally unforced dwelling in
its superiority to the instrumental nature through which it acts. His mastery
over things is because he has become one soul with all things. To take an
image from Roman institutions, the Stoic freedom is that of the {\it libertus},
the freedman, who is still really a dependent on the power that once held him
enslaved; his is a freedom allowed by Nature because he has merited it. The
freedom of the Gita is that of the freeman, the true freedom of the birth into
the higher nature, self-existent in its divinity. Whatever he does and however
he lives, the free soul lives in the Divine; he is the privileged child of the
mansion, \s{b\=alavat}, who cannot err or fall because all he is and does is full
of the Perfect, the All-blissful, the All-loving, the All-beautiful. The kingdom
which he enjoys, \s{r\=ajya\.m sam\,rddham}, is a sweet and happy dominion of
which it may be said, in the pregnant phrase of the Greek thinker, “The
kingdom is of the child.”
\par The knowledge of the philosopher is that of the true nature of mundane
existence, the transience of outward things, the
Page 207

vanity of the world's differences and distinctions, the superiority of the inner
calm, peace, light, self-dependence. It is an equality of philosophic
indifference; it brings a high calm, but not the greater spiritual joy; it is an
isolated freedom, a wisdom like that of the Lucretian sage high in his
superiority upon the cliff-top whence he looks down on men tossed still upon
the tempestuous waters from which he has escaped,—in the end something
after all aloof and ineffective. The Gita admits the philosophic motive of
indifference as a preliminary movement; but the indifference to which it
finally arrives, if indeed that inadequate word can be at all applied, has
nothing in it of the philosophic aloofness. It is indeed a position as of one
seated above, \s{ud\=as\=inavat}, but as the Divine is seated above, having no
need at all in the world, yet he does works always and is present everywhere
supporting, helping, guiding the labour of creatures. This equality is founded
upon oneness with all beings. It brings in what is wanting to the philosophic
equality; for its soul is the soul of peace, but also it is the soul of love. It sees
all beings without exception in the Divine, it is one self with the Self of all
existences and therefore it is in supreme sympathy with all of them. Without
exception, \s{a\'se\,se\,na}, not only with all that is good and fair and pleases;
nothing and no one, however vile, fallen, criminal, repellent in appearance,
can be excluded from this universal, this whole-souled sympathy and spiritual
oneness. Here there is no room, not merely for hatred or anger or
uncharitableness, but for aloofness, disdain or any petty pride of superiority.
A divine compassion for the ignorance of the struggling mind, a divine will to
pour forth on it all light and power and happiness there will be, indeed, for the
apparent man; but for the divine Soul within him there will be more, there will
be adoration and love. For from all, from the thief and the harlot and the
outcaste as from the saint and the sage, the Beloved looks forth and cries to
us, “This is I.” “He who loves Me in all beings,”—what greater word of
power for the utmost intensities and profundities of divine and universal love,
has been uttered by any philosophy or any religion?
\par Resignation is the basis of a kind of religious equality, submission to the
divine will, a patient bearing of the cross, a
Page 208

submissive forbearance. In the Gita this element takes the more ample form
of an entire surrender of the whole being to God. It is not merely a passive
submission, but an active self-giving; not only a seeing and an accepting of
the divine Will in all things, but a giving up of one's own will to be the
instrument of the Master of works, and this not with the lesser idea of being a
servant of God, but, eventually at least, of such a complete renunciation both
of the consciousness and the works to him that our being becomes one with
his being and the impersonalised nature only an instrument and nothing else.
All result good or bad, pleasing or unpleasing, fortunate or unfortunate, is
accepted as belonging to the Master of our actions, so that finally not only are
grief and suffering borne, but they are banished: a perfect equality of the
emotional mind is established. There is no assumption of personal will in the
instrument; it is seen that all is already worked out in the omniscient
prescience and omnipotent effective power of the universal Divine and that
the egoism of men cannot alter the workings of that Will. Therefore, the final
attitude is that enjoined on Arjuna in a later chapter, “All has been already
done by Me in my divine will and foresight; become only the occasion, O
Arjuna,” \s{nimitta-m\=atra\.m bhava savyas\=acin}. This attitude must lead finally
to an absolute union of the personal with the Divine Will and, with the growth
of knowledge, bring about a faultless response of the instrument to the divine
Power and Knowledge. A perfect, an absolute equality of self-surrender, the
mentality a passive channel of the divine Light and Power, the active being a
mightily effective instrument for its work in the world, will be the poise of this
supreme union of the Transcendent, the universal and the individual.
\par Equality too there will be with regard to the action of others upon us.
Nothing that they can do will alter the inner oneness, love, sympathy which
arises from the perception of the one Self in all, the Divine in all beings. But a
resigned forbearance and submission to them and their deeds, a passive
non-resistance, will be no necessary part of the action; it cannot be, since a
constant instrumental obedience to the divine and universal Will must mean in
the shock of opposite forces that fill the world a
Page 209

conflict with personal wills which seek rather their own egoistic satisfaction.
Therefore Arjuna is bidden to resist, to fight, to conquer; but, to fight without
hatred or personal desire or personal enmity or antagonism, since to the
liberated soul these feelings are impossible. To act for the \s{lokasa\.ngraha},
impersonally, for the keeping and leading of the peoples on the path to the
divine goal, is a rule which rises necessarily from the oneness of the soul with
the Divine, the universal Being, since that is the whole sense and drift of the
universal action. Nor does it conflict with our oneness with all beings, even
those who present themselves here as opponents and enemies. For the divine
goal is their goal also, since it is the secret aim of all, even of those whose
outward minds, misled by ignorance and egoism, would wander from the path
and resist the impulsion. Resistance and defeat are the best outward service
that can be done to them. By this perception the Gita avoids the limiting
conclusion which might have been drawn from a doctrine of equality
impracticably overriding all relations and of a weakening love without
knowledge, while it keeps the one thing essential unimpaired. For the soul
oneness with all, for the heart calm universal love, sympathy, compassion, but
for the hands freedom to work out impersonally the good, not of this or that
person only without regard to or to the detriment of the divine plan, but the
purpose of the creation, the progressing welfare and salvation of men, the
total good of all existences.
\par Oneness with God, oneness with all beings, the realisation of the eternal
divine unity everywhere and the drawing onwards of men towards that
oneness are the law of life which arises from the teachings of the Gita. There
can be none greater, wider, more profound. Liberated oneself, to live in this
oneness, to help mankind on the path that leads towards it and meanwhile to
do all works for God and help man also to do with joy and acceptance all the
works to which he is called, \s{k\,rtsna-karma-k\,rt}, \s{sarvakarm\=a\,ni}
\s{jo\,sayan}, no greater or more liberal rule of divine works can be given.
This freedom and this oneness are the secret goal of our human nature and
the ultimate will in the existence of the race. It is that to which it must turn
for the happiness all
Page 210

mankind is now vainly seeking, when once men lift their eyes and their hearts
to see the Divine in them and around, in all and everywhere, \s{sarve\,su},
\s{sarvatra}, and learn that it is in him they live, while this lower nature of
division is only a prison-wall which they must break down or at best an
infant-school which they must outgrow, so that they may become adult in
nature and free in spirit. To be made one self with God above and God in
man and God in the world is the sense of liberation and the secret of
perfection.
Page 211

\par
\HN XXI
\par
\ht The Determinism of Nature
\par\drop When we can live in the higher Self by the unity of works and
self-knowledge, we become superior to the method of the lower workings of
Prakriti. We are no longer enslaved to Nature and her gunas, but, one with
the Ishwara, the master of our nature, we are able to use her without
subjection to the chain of Karma, for the purposes of the Divine Will in us;
for that is what the greater Self in us is, he is the Lord of her works and
unaffected by the troubled stress of her reactions. The soul ignorant in
Nature, on the contrary, is enslaved by that ignorance to her modes, because
it is identified there, not felicitously with its true self, not with the Divine who
is seated above her, but stupidly and unhappily with the ego-mind which is a
subordinate factor in her operations in spite of the exaggerated figure it
makes, a mere mental knot and point of reference for the play of the natural
workings. To break this knot, no longer to make the ego the centre and
beneficiary of our works, but to derive all from and refer all to the divine
Supersoul is the way to become superior to all the restless trouble of Nature's
modes. For it is to live in the supreme consciousness, of which the ego-mind
is a degradation, and to act in an equal and unified Will and Force and not in
the unequal play of the gunas which is a broken seeking and striving, a
disturbance, an inferior Maya.
\par The passages in which the Gita lays stress on the subjection of the
ego-soul to Nature, have by some been understood as the enunciation of an
absolute and a mechanical determinism which leaves no room for any
freedom within the cosmic existence. Certainly, the language it uses is
emphatic and seems very absolute. But we must take, here as elsewhere, the
thought of the Gita as a whole and not force its affirmations in their solitary
sense quite detached from each other,—as indeed every truth,
Page 212

however true in itself, yet, taken apart from others which at once limit and
complete it, becomes a snare to bind the intellect and a misleading dogma; for
in reality each is one thread of a complex weft and no thread must be taken
apart from the weft. Everything in the Gita is even so interwoven and must
be understood in its relation to the whole. The Gita itself makes a distinction
between those who have not the knowledge of the whole, \s{ak\,rtsnavida\,h},
and are misled by the partial truths of existence, and the Yogin who has the
synthetic knowledge of the totality, \s{k\,rtsna-vit}. To see all existence
steadily and see it whole and not be misled by its conflicting truths, is the first
necessity for the calm and complete wisdom to which the Yogin is called
upon to rise. A certain absolute freedom is one aspect of the soul's relations
with Nature at one pole of our complex being; a certain absolute determinism
by Nature is the opposite aspect at its opposite pole; and there is also a partial
and apparent, therefore an unreal eidolon of liberty which the soul receives
by a contorted reflection of these two opposite truths in the developing
mentality. It is the latter to which we ordinarily give, more or less
inaccurately, the name of free will; but the Gita regards nothing as freedom
which is not a complete liberation and mastery.
\par We have always to keep in mind the two great doctrines which stand
behind all the Gita's teachings with regard to the soul and Nature,—the
Sankhya truth of the Purusha and Prakriti corrected and completed by the
Vedantic truth of the threefold Purusha and the double Prakriti of which the
lower form is the Maya of the three gunas and the higher is the divine nature
and the true soul-nature. This is the key which reconciles and explains what
we might have otherwise to leave as contradictions and inconsistencies.
There are, in fact, different planes of our conscious existence, and what is
practical truth on one plane ceases to be true, because it assumes a quite
different appearance, as soon as we rise to a higher level from which we can
see things more in the whole. Recent scientific discovery has shown that
man, animal, plant and even the metal have essentially the same vital
reactions and they would, therefore,
Page 213

if each has a certain kind of what for want of a better word we must call
nervous consciousness, possess the same basis of mechanical psychology.
Yet if each of these could give its own mental account of what it
experiences, we should have four quite different and largely contradictory
statements of the same reactions and the same natural principles, because
they get, as we rise in the scale of being, a different meaning and value and
have to be judged by a different outlook. So it is with the levels of the human
soul. What we now call in our ordinary mentality our free will and have a
certain limited justification for so calling it, yet appears to the Yogin who has
climbed beyond and to whom our night is day and our day night, not free will
at all, but a subjection to the modes of Nature. He regards the same facts,
but from the higher outlook of the whole-knower, \s{k\,rtsna-vit}, while we
view it altogether from the more limited mentality of our partial knowledge,
\s{ak\,rtsnavida\,h}, which is an ignorance. What we vaunt of as our freedom is
to him bondage.
\par The perception of the ignorance of our assumption of freedom while one
is all the time in the meshes of this lower nature, is the view-point at which
the Gita arrives and it is in contradiction to this ignorant claim that it affirms
the complete subjection of the ego-soul on this plane to the gunas. “While the
actions are being entirely done by the modes of Nature,” it says, “he whose
self is bewildered by egoism thinks that it is his `I' which is doing them. But
one who knows the true principles of the divisions of the modes and of
works, realises that it is the modes which are acting and reacting on each
other and is not caught in them by attachment. Those who are bewildered by
the modes, get attached to the modes and their works; dull minds, not
knowers of the whole, let not the knower of the whole disturb them in their
mental standpoint. Giving up thy works to Me, free from desire and egoism,
fight delivered from the fever of thy soul.” Here there is the clear distinction
between two levels of consciousness, two standpoints of action, that of the
soul caught in the web of its egoistic nature and doing works with the idea,
but not the reality of free will, under the impulsion of Nature, and that of the
soul delivered from its identification with the
Page 214

ego, observing, sanctioning and governing the works of Nature from above
her.
\par We speak of the soul being subject to Nature; but on the other hand the
Gita in distinguishing the properties of the soul and Nature affirms that while
Nature is the executrix, the soul is always the lord, \s{\=i\'svara}. It speaks here
of the self being bewildered by egoism, but the real Self to the Vedantin is the
divine, eternally free and self-aware. What then is this self that is bewildered
by Nature, this soul that is subject to her? The answer is that we are
speaking here in the common parlance of our lower or mental view of things;
we are speaking of the apparent self, of the apparent soul, not of the real self,
not of the true Purusha. It is really the ego which is subject to Nature,
inevitably, because it is itself part of Nature, one functioning of her
machinery; but when the self-awareness in the mind-consciousness identifies
itself with the ego, it creates the appearance of a lower self, an ego-self. And
so too what we think of ordinarily as the soul is really the natural personality,
not the true Person, the Purusha, but the desire-soul in us which is a
reflection of the consciousness of the Purusha in the workings of Prakriti: it
is, in fact, itself only an action of the three modes and therefore a part of
Nature. Thus there are, we may say, two souls in us, the apparent or
desire-soul, which changes with the mutations of the gunas and is entirely
constituted and determined by them, and the free and eternal Purusha not
limited by Nature and her gunas. We have two selves, the apparent self,
which is only the ego, that mental centre in us which takes up this mutable
action of Prakriti, this mutable personality, and which says “I am this
personality, I am this natural being who am doing these works,”—but the
natural being is simply Nature, a composite of the gunas,—and the true self
which is, indeed, the upholder, the possessor and the lord of Nature and
figured in her, but is not itself the mutable natural personality. The way to be
free must then be to get rid of the desires of this desire-soul and the false
self-view of this ego. “Having become free from desire and egoism,” cries
the Teacher, “fight with all the fever of thy soul passed away from
thee,”—\s{nir\=a\'s\=ir nirmamo bh\=utv\=a}.
Page 215

\par This view of our being starts from the Sankhya analysis of the dual
principle in our nature, Purusha and Prakriti. Purusha is inactive, \s{akart\=a};
Prakriti is active, \s{kartr\=i}: Purusha is the being full of the light of
consciousness; Prakriti is the Nature, mechanical, reflecting all her works in
the conscious witness, the Purusha. Prakriti works by the inequality of her
three modes, gunas, in perpetual collision and intermixture and mutation with
each other; and by her function of ego-mind she gets the Purusha to identify
himself with all this working and so creates the sense of active, mutable,
temporal personality in the silent eternity of the Self. The impure natural
consciousness overclouds the pure soul-consciousness; the mind forgets the
Person in the ego and the personality; we suffer the discriminating
intelligence to be carried away by the sense-mind and its outgoing functions
and by the desire of the life and the body. So long as the Purusha sanctions
this action, ego and desire and ignorance must govern the natural being.
\par But if this were all, then the only remedy would be to withdraw
altogether the sanction, suffer or compel all our nature by this withdrawal to
fall into a motionless equilibrium of the three gunas and so cease from all
action. But this is precisely the remedy,—though it is undoubtedly a remedy,
one which abolishes, we might say, the patient along with the
disease,—which the Gita constantly discourages. Especially, to resort to a
tamasic inaction is just what the ignorant will do if this truth is thrust upon
them; the discriminating mind in them will fall into a false division, a false
opposition, \s{buddhibheda}; their active nature and their intelligence will be
divided against each other and produce a disturbance and confusion without
true issue, a false and self-deceiving line of action, \s{mithy\=ac\=ara}, or else a
mere tamasic inertia, cessation of works, diminution of the will to life and
action, not therefore a liberation, but rather a subjection to the lowest of the
three gunas, to \s{tamas}, the principle of ignorance and of inertia. Or else
they will not be able to understand at all, they will find fault with this higher
teaching, assert against it their present mental experience, their ignorant idea
of free will and, yet more confirmed by the plausibility of their logic in their
Page 216

bewilderment and the deception of ego and desire, lose their chance of
liberation in a deeper, more obstinate confirmation of the ignorance.
\par In fact, these higher truths can only be helpful, because there only they
are true to experience and can be lived, on a higher and vaster plane of
consciousness and being. To view these truths from below is to mis-see,
misunderstand and probably to misuse them. It is a higher truth that the
distinction of good and evil is indeed a practical fact and law valid for the
egoistic human life which is the stage of transition from the animal to the
divine, but on a higher plane we rise beyond good and evil, are above their
duality even as the Godhead is above it. But the unripe mind, seizing on this
truth without rising from the lower consciousness where it is not practically
valid, will simply make it a convenient excuse for indulging its Asuric
propensities, denying the distinction between good and evil altogether and
falling by self-indulgence deeper into the morass of perdition,
\s{sarva-j\~n\=ana-vim\=u\,dh\=an na\,s\,t\=an acetasa\,h}. So too with this truth of the
determinism of Nature; it will be mis-seen and misused, as those misuse it
who declare that a man is what his nature has made him and cannot do
otherwise than as his nature compels him. It is true in a sense, but not in the
sense which is attached to it, not in the sense that the ego-self can claim
irresponsibility and impunity for itself in its works; for it has will and it has
desire and so long as it acts according to its will and desire, even though that
be its nature, it must bear the reactions of its Karma. It is in a net, if you will,
a snare which may well seem perplexing, illogical, unjust, terrible to its
present experience, to its limited self-knowledge, but a snare of its own
choice, a net of its own weaving.
\par The Gita says, indeed, “All existences follow their nature and what shall
coercing it avail?” which seems, if we take it by itself, a hopelessly absolute
assertion of the omnipotence of Nature over the soul; “even the man of
knowledge acts according to his own nature.” And on this it founds the
injunction to follow faithfully in our action the law of our nature. “Better is
one's own law of works, \s{svadharma}, though in itself faulty than an alien
Page 217

law well wrought out; death in one's own law of being is better, perilous is it
to follow an alien law.” What is precisely meant by this \s{svadharma} we
have to wait to see until we get to the more elaborate disquisition in the
closing chapters about Purusha and Prakriti and the gunas; but certainly it
does not mean that we are to follow any impulse, even though evil, which
what we call our nature dictates to us. For between these two verses the
Gita throws in this further injunction, “In the object of this or that sense liking
and disliking are set in ambush; fall not into their power, for they are the
besetters of the soul in its path.” And immediately after this, in answer to
Arjuna's objection who asks him, if there is no fault in following our Nature,
what are we then to say of that in us which drives a man to sin, as if by
force, even against his own struggling will, the Teacher replies that this is
desire and its companion wrath, children of rajas, the second guna, the
principle of passion, and this desire is the soul's great enemy and has to be
slain. Abstention from evil-doing it declares to be the first condition for
liberation, and always it enjoins self-mastery, self-control, \s{sa\.myama},
control of the mind, senses, all the lower being.
\par There is therefore a distinction to be made between what is essential in
the nature, its native and inevitable action, which it avails not at all to repress,
suppress, coerce, and what is accidental to it, its wanderings, confusions,
perversions, over which we must certainly get control. There is a distinction
implied too between coercion and suppression, \s{nigraha}, and control with
right use and right guidance, \s{sa\.myama}. The former is a violence done to
the nature by the will, which in the end depresses the natural powers of the
being, \s{\=atm\=anam avas\=adayet}; the latter is the control of the lower by the
higher self, which successfully gives to those powers their right action and
their maximum efficiency,—\s{yoga\,h karmasu kau\'salam}. This nature of
\s{sa\.myama} is made very clear by the Gita in the opening of its sixth
chapter, “By the self thou shouldst deliver the self, thou shouldst not depress
and cast down the self (whether by self-indulgence or suppression); for the
self is the friend of the self and the self is the enemy. To the man is his self a
friend in whom the (lower)
Page 218

self has been conquered by the (higher) self, but to him who is not in
possession of his (higher) self, the (lower) self is as if an enemy and it acts as
an enemy.” When one has conquered one's self and attained to the calm of a
perfect self-mastery and self-possession, then is the supreme self in a man
founded and poised even in his outwardly conscious human being,
\s{sam\=ahita}. In other words, to master the lower self by the higher, the
natural self by the spiritual is the way of man's perfection and liberation.
\par Here then is a very great qualification of the determinism of Nature, a
precise limitation of its meaning and scope. How the passage from subjection
to mastery works out is best seen if we observe the working of the gunas in
the scale of Nature from the bottom to the top. At the bottom are the
existences in which the principle of tamas is supreme, the beings who have
not yet attained to the light of self-consciousness and are utterly driven by the
current of Nature. There is a will even in the atom, but we see clearly
enough that it is not free will, because it is mechanical and the atom does not
possess the will, but is possessed by it. Here the \s{buddhi}, the element of
intelligence and will in Prakriti, is actually and plainly what the Sankhya
asserts it to be, \s{ja\,da}, a mechanical, even an inconscient principle in which
the light of the conscious Soul has not at all struggled to the surface: the atom
is not conscious of an intelligent will; tamas, the inert and ignorant principle,
has its grip on it, contains \s{rajas}, conceals \s{sattva} within itself and holds
a high holiday of mastery, Nature compelling this form of existence to act
with a stupendous force indeed, but as a mechanical instrument,
\s{yantr\=ar\=u\,dha\.m m\=ayay\=a}. Next, in the plant the principle of \s{rajas} has
struggled to the surface, with its power of life, with its capacity of the
nervous reactions which in us are recognisable as pleasure and suffering, but
\s{sattva} is quite involved, has not yet emerged to awaken the light of a
conscious intelligent will; all is still mechanical, subconscient or half-conscient,
tamas stronger than rajas, both gaolers of the imprisoned sattwa.
\par In the animal, though tamas is still strong, though we may still describe
him as belonging to the tamasic creation, \s{t\=amasa sarga}, yet rajas prevails
much more against tamas, brings with
Page 219

it its developed power of life, desire, emotion, passion, pleasure, suffering,
while sattwa, emerging, but still dependent on the lower action, contributes to
these the first light of the conscious mind, the mechanical sense of ego,
conscious memory, a certain kind of thought, especially the wonders of
instinct and animal intuition. But as yet the buddhi, the intelligent will, has not
developed the full light of consciousness; therefore, no responsibility can be
attributed to the animal for its actions. The tiger can be no more blamed for
killing and devouring than the atom for its blind movements, the fire for
burning and consuming or the storm for its destructions. If it could answer the
question, the tiger would indeed say, like man, that it had free will, it would
have the egoism of the doer, it would say, “I kill, I devour”; but we can see
clearly enough that it is not really the tiger, but Nature in the tiger that kills, it
is Nature in the tiger that devours; and if it refrains from killing or devouring,
it is from satiety, from fear or from indolence, from another principle of
Nature in it, from the action of the guna called tamas. As it was Nature in the
animal that killed, so it is Nature in the animal that refrained from killing.
Whatever soul is in it, sanctions passively the action of Nature, is as much
passive in its passion and activity as in its indolence or inaction. The animal
like the atom acts according to the mechanism of its Nature, and not
otherwise, \s{sad\,r\'sa\.m ce\,s\,tate svasy\=a\,h prak\,rte\,h}, as if mounted on a
machine, \s{yantr\=ar\=u\,dho m\=ayay\=a}.
\par Well, but in man at least there is another action, a free soul, a free will, a
sense of responsibility, a real doer other than Nature, other than the
mechanism of Maya? So it seems, because in man there is a conscious
intelligent will; \s{buddhi} is full of the light of the observing Purusha, who
through it, it seems, observes, understands, approves or disapproves, gives or
withholds the sanction, seems indeed at last to begin to be the lord of his
nature. Man is not like the tiger or the fire or the storm; he cannot kill and say
as a sufficient justification, “I am acting according to my nature”, and he
cannot do it, because he has not the nature and not, therefore, the law of
action, \s{svadharma}, of the tiger, storm or fire. He has a conscious
intelligent will,
Page 220

a \s{buddhi}, and to that he must refer his actions. If he does not do so, if he
acts blindly according to his impulses and passions, then the law of his being
is not rightly worked out, \s{svadharma\,h su-anu\,s\,thita\,h}, he has not acted
according to the full measure of his humanity, but even as might the animal. It
is true that the principle of \s{rajas} or the principle of \s{tamas} gets hold of
his \s{buddhi} and induces it to justify any and every action he commits or
any avoidance of action; but still the justification or at least the reference to
the buddhi must be there either before or after the action is committed. And,
besides, in man \s{sattva} is awake and acts not only as intelligence and
intelligent will, but as a seeking for light, for right knowledge and right action
according to that knowledge, as a sympathetic perception of the existence
and claims of others, as an attempt to know the higher law of his own nature,
which the sattwic principle in him creates, and to obey it, and as a conception
of the greater peace and happiness which virtue, knowledge and sympathy
bring in their train. He knows more or less imperfectly that he has to govern
his rajasic and tamasic by his sattwic nature and that thither tends the
perfection of his normal humanity.
\par But is the condition of the predominantly sattwic nature freedom and is
this will in man a free will? That the Gita from the standpoint of a higher
consciousness in which alone is true freedom, denies. The buddhi or
conscious intelligent will is still an instrument of Nature and when it acts,
even in the most sattwic sense, it is still Nature which acts and the soul which
is carried on the wheel by Maya. At any rate, at least nine-tenths of our
freedom of will is a palpable fiction; that will is created and determined not by
its own self-existent action at a given moment, but by our past, our heredity,
our training, our environment, the whole tremendous complex thing we call
Karma, which is, behind us, the whole past action of Nature on us and the
world converging in the individual, determining what he is, determining what
his will shall be at a given moment and determining, as far as analysis can
see, even its action at that moment. The ego associates itself always with its
Karma and it says “I did” and “I will” and “I suffer”, but if it looks at
Page 221

itself and sees how it was made, it is obliged to say of man as of the animal,
“Nature did this in me, Nature wills in me”, and if it qualifies by saying “my
Nature”, that only means “Nature as self-determined in this individual
creature”. It was the strong perception of this aspect of existence which
compelled the Buddhists to declare that all is Karma and that there is no self
in existence, that the idea of self is only a delusion of the ego-mind. When the
ego thinks “I choose and will this virtuous and not that evil action”, it is simply
associating itself, somewhat like the fly on the wheel, or rather as might a cog
or other part of a mechanism if it were conscious, with a predominant wave
or a formed current of the sattwic principle by which Nature chooses through
the buddhi one type of action in preference to another. Nature forms itself in
us and wills in us, the Sankhya would say, for the pleasure of the inactive
observing Purusha.
\par But even if this extreme statement has to be qualified, and we shall see
hereafter in what sense, still the freedom of our individual will, if we choose
to give it that name, is very relative and almost infinitesimal, so much is it
mixed up with other determining elements. Its strongest power does not
amount to mastery. It cannot be relied upon to resist the strong wave of
circumstance or of other nature which either overbears or modifies or mixes
up with it or at the best subtly deceives and circumvents it. Even the most
sattwic will is so overborne or mixed up with or circumvented by the rajasic
and tamasic gunas as to be only in part sattwic, and thence arises that
sufficiently strong element of self-deception, of a quite involuntary and even
innocent make-believe and hiding from oneself which the merciless eye of
the psychologist detects even in the best human action. When we think that
we are acting quite freely, powers are concealed behind our action which
escape the most careful self-introspection; when we think that we are free
from ego, the ego is there, concealed, in the mind of the saint as in that of the
sinner. When our eyes are really opened on our action and its springs, we are
obliged to say with the Gita “\s{gu\,n\=a gu\,ne\,su vartante}”, “it was the modes of
Nature that were acting upon the modes.”
\par For this reason even a high predominance of the sattwic
Page 222

principle does not constitute freedom. For, as the Gita points out, the sattwa
binds, as much as the other gunas, and binds just in the same way, by desire,
by ego; a nobler desire, a purer ego,—but so long as in any form these two
hold the being, there is no freedom. The man of virtue, of knowledge, has his
ego of the virtuous man, his ego of knowledge, and it is that sattwic ego
which he seeks to satisfy; for his own sake he seeks virtue and knowledge.
Only when we cease to satisfy the ego, to think and to will from the ego, the
limited “I” in us, then is there a real freedom. In other words, freedom,
highest self-mastery begin when above the natural self we see and hold the
supreme Self of which the ego is an obstructing veil and a blinding shadow.
And that can only be when we see the one Self in us seated above Nature
and make our individual being one with it in being and consciousness and in
its individual nature of action only an instrument of a supreme Will, the one
Will that is really free. For that we must rise high above the three gunas,
become \s{trigu\,n\=at\=ita}; for that Self is beyond even the sattwic principle. We
have to climb to it through the sattwa, but we attain to it only when we get
beyond sattwa; we reach out to it from the ego, but only reach it by leaving
the ego. We are drawn towards it by the highest, most passionate, most
stupendous and ecstatic of all desires; but we can securely live in it only
when all desire drops away from us. We have at a certain stage to liberate
ourselves even from the desire of our liberation.
Page 223

\par
\HN XXII
\par
\ht Beyond the Modes of Nature
\par\drop So far then extends the determinism of Nature, and what it amounts
to is this that the ego from which we act is itself an instrument of the action
of Prakriti and cannot therefore be free from the control of Prakriti; the will
of the ego is a will determined by Prakriti, it is a part of the nature as it has
been formed in us by the sum of its own past action and self-modification,
and by the nature in us so formed and the will in it so formed our present
action also is determined. It is said by some that the first initiating action is
always free to our choice however much all that follows may be determined
by that, and in this power of initiation and its effect on our future lies our
responsibility. But where is that first action in Nature which has no
determining past behind it, where that present condition of our nature which is
not in sum and detail the result of the action of our past nature? We have that
impression of a free initial act because we are living at every moment from
our present on towards our future and we do not live back constantly from
our present into our past, so that what is strongly vivid to our minds is the
present and its consequences while we have a much less vivid hold of our
present as entirely the consequence of our past; this latter we are apt to look
on as if it were dead and done with. We speak and act as if we were
perfectly free in the pure and virgin moment to do what we will with
ourselves using an absolute inward independence of choice. But there is no
such absolute liberty, our choice has no such independence.
\par Certainly, the will in us has always to choose between a certain number
of possibilities, for that is the way in which Nature always acts; even our
passivity, our refusal to will, is itself a choice, itself an act of the will of
Nature in us; even in the atom there is a will always at its work. The whole
difference
Page 224

is the extent to which we associate our idea of self with the action of the will
in Nature; when we so associate ourselves, we think of it as our will and say
that it is a free will and that it is we who are acting. And error or not, illusion
or not, this idea of our will, of our action is not a thing of no consequence, of
no utility; everything in Nature has a consequence and a utility. It is rather
that process of our conscious being by which Nature in us becomes more and
more aware of and responsive to the presence of the secret Purusha within
her and opens by that increase of knowledge to a greater possibility of action;
it is by the aid of the ego-idea and the personal will that she raises herself to
her own higher possibilities, rises out of the sheer or else the predominant
passivity of the tamasic nature into the passion and the struggle of the rajasic
nature and from the passion and the struggle of the rajasic nature to the
greater light, happiness and purity of the sattwic nature. The relative
self-mastery gained by the natural man over himself is the dominion achieved
by the higher possibilities of his nature over its lower possibilities, and this is
done in him when he associates his idea of self with the struggle of the higher
guna to get the mastery, the predominance over the lower guna. The sense of
free will, illusion or not, is a necessary machinery of the action of Nature,
necessary for man during his progress, and it would be disastrous for him to
lose it before he is ready for a higher truth. If it be said, as it has been said,
that Nature deludes man to fulfil her behests and that the idea of a free
individual will is the most powerful of these delusions, then it must also be
said that the delusion is for his good and without it he could not rise to his full
possibilities.
\par But it is not a sheer delusion, it is only an error of standpoint and an error
of placement. The ego thinks that it is the real self and acts as if it were the
true centre of action and as if all existed for its sake, and there it commits an
error of standpoint and placement. It is not wrong in thinking that there is
something or someone within ourselves, within this action of our nature, who
is the true centre of its action and for whom all exists; but this is not the ego,
it is the Lord secret within
Page 225

our hearts, the divine Purusha, and the Jiva, other than ego, who is a portion
of his being. The self-assertion of ego-sense is the broken and distorted
shadow in our minds of the truth that there is a real Self within us which is
the master of all and for whom and at whose behest Nature goes about her
works. So too the ego's idea of free will is a distorted and misplaced sense of
the truth that there is a free Self within us and that the will in Nature is only a
modified and partial reflection of its will, modified and partial because it lives
in the successive moments of Time and acts by a constant series of
modifications which forget much of their own precedents and are only
imperfectly conscious of their own consequences and aims. But the Will
within, exceeding the moments of Time, knows all these, and the action of
Nature in us is an attempt, we might say, to work out under the difficult
conditions of a natural and egoistic ignorance what is foreseen in full
supramental light by the inner Will and Knowledge.
\par But a time must come in our progress when we are ready to open our
eyes to the real truth of our being, and then the error of our egoistic free will
must fall away from us. The rejection of the idea of egoistic free will does
not imply a cessation of action, because Nature is the doer and carries out
her action after this machinery is dispensed with even as she did before it
came into usage in the process of her evolution. In the man who has rejected
it, it may even be possible for her to develop a greater action; for his mind
may be more aware of all that his nature is by the self-creation of the past,
more aware of the powers that environ and are working upon it to help or to
hinder its growth, more aware too of the latent greater possibilities which it
contains by virtue of all in it that is unexpressed, yet capable of expression;
and this mind may be a freer channel for the sanction of the Purusha to the
greater possibilities that it sees and a freer instrument for the response of
Nature, for her resultant attempt at their development and realisation. But the
rejection of free will must not be a mere fatalism or idea of natural
determinism in the understanding without any vision of the real Self in us; for
then the ego still remains as our sole idea of self and, as that
Page 226

is always the instrument of Prakriti, we still act by the ego and with our will
as her instrument, and the idea in us brings no real change, but only a
modification of our intellectual attitude. We shall have accepted the
phenomenal truth of the determination of our egoistic being and action by
Nature, we shall have seen our subjection: but we shall not have seen the
unborn Self within which is above the action of the gunas; we shall not have
seen wherein lies our gate of freedom. Nature and ego are not all we are;
there is the free soul, the Purusha.
\par But in what consists this freedom of the Purusha? The Purusha of the
current Sankhya philosophy is free in the essence of his being, but because
he is the non-doer, \s{akart\=a}; and in so far as he permits Nature to throw on
the inactive Soul her shadow of action, he becomes bound phenomenally by
the actions of the gunas and cannot recover his freedom except by
dissociation from her and by cessation of her activities. If then a man casts
from him the idea of himself as the doer or of the works as his, if, as the Gita
enjoins, he fixes himself in the view of himself as the inactive non-doer,
\s{\=atm\=anam akart\=aram}, and all action as not his own but Nature's, as the
play of her gunas, will not a like result follow? The Sankhya Purusha is the
giver of the sanction, but a passive sanction only, \s{anumati}, the work is
entirely Nature's; essentially he is the witness and sustainer, not the
governing and active consciousness of the universal Godhead. He is the Soul
that sees and accepts, as a spectator accepts the representation of a play he
is watching, not the Soul that both governs and watches the play planned by
himself and staged in his own being. If then he withdraws the sanction, if he
refuses to acknowledge the illusion of doing by which the play continues, he
ceases also to be the sustainer and the action comes to a stop, since it is only
for the pleasure of the witnessing conscious Soul that Nature performs it and
only by his support that she can maintain it. Therefore it is evident that the
Gita's conception of the relations of the Purusha and Prakriti are not the
Sankhya's, since the same movement leads to a quite different result, in one
case to cessation of works, in the other to a great, a selfless and desireless, a
divine action. In the Sankhya Soul and Nature are two different
Page 227

entities, in the Gita they are two aspects, two powers of one self-existent
being; the Soul is not only giver of the sanction, but lord of Nature, Ishwara,
through her enjoying the play of the world, through her executing divine will
and knowledge in a scheme of things supported by his sanction and existing
by his immanent presence, existing in his being, governed by the law of his
being and by the conscious will within it. To know, to respond to, to live in the
divine being and nature of this Soul is the object of withdrawing from the ego
and its action. One rises then above the lower nature of the gunas to the
higher divine nature.
\par The movement by which this ascension is determined results from the
complex poise of the Soul in its relations with Nature; it depends on the Gita's
idea of the triple Purusha. The Soul that immediately informs the action, the
mutations, the successive becomings of Nature, is the Kshara, that which
seems to change with her changes, to move in her motion, the Person who
follows in his idea of his being the changes of his personality brought about by
the continuous action of her Karma. Nature here is Kshara, a constant
movement and mutation in Time, a constant becoming. But this Nature is
simply the executive power of the Soul itself; for only by what he is, can she
become, only according to the possibilities of his becoming, can she act; she
works out the becoming of his being. Her Karma is determined by
Swabhava, the own-nature, the law of self-becoming of the soul, even
though, because it is the agent and executive of the becoming, the action
rather seems often to determine the nature. According to what we are, we
act, and by our action we develop, we work out what we are. Nature is the
action, the mutation, the becoming, and it is the Power that executes all these;
but the Soul is the conscious Being from which that Power proceeds, from
whose luminous stuff of consciousness she has drawn the variable will that
changes and expresses its changes in her actions. And this Soul is One and
Many; it is the one Life-being out of which all life is constituted and it is all
these living beings; it is the cosmic Existent and it is all this multitude of
cosmic existences, \s{sarvabh\=ut\=ani}, for all these are One; all the many
Purushas are in their original being the one and only
Page 228

Purusha. But the mechanism of the ego-sense in Nature, which is part of her
action, induces the mind to identify the soul's consciousness with the limited
becoming of the moment, with the sum of her active consciousness in a given
field of space and time, with the result from moment to moment of the sum of
her past actions. It is possible to realise in a way the unity of all these beings
even in Nature herself and to become aware of a cosmic Soul which is
manifest in the whole action of cosmic Nature, Nature manifesting the Soul,
the Soul constituting the Nature. But this is to become aware only of the
great cosmic Becoming, which is not false or unreal, but the knowledge of
which alone does not give us the true knowledge of our Self; for our true Self
is always something more than this and something beyond it.
\par For, beyond the soul manifest in Nature and bound up with its action, is
another status of the Purusha, which is entirely a status and not at all an
action; that is the silent, the immutable, the all-pervading, self-existent,
motionless Self, \s{sarvagatam acalam}, immutable Being and not Becoming,
the Akshara. In the Kshara the Soul is involved in the action of Nature,
therefore it is concentrated, loses itself, as it were, in the moments of Time, in
the waves of the Becoming, not really, but only in appearance and by
following the current; in the Akshara Nature falls to silence and rest in the
Soul, therefore it becomes aware of its immutable Being. The Kshara is the
Sankhya's Purusha when it reflects the varied workings of the gunas of
Nature, and it knows itself as the Saguna, the Personal; the Akshara is the
Sankhya's Purusha when these gunas have fallen into a state of equilibrium,
and it knows itself as the Nirguna, the Impersonal. Therefore while the
Kshara, associating itself with the work of Prakriti, seems to be the doer of
works, \s{kart\=a}, the Akshara dissociated from all the workings of the gunas
is the inactive non-doer, \s{akart\=a}, and witness. The soul of man, when it
takes the poise of the Kshara, identifies itself with the play of personality and
readily clouds its self-knowledge with the ego-sense in Nature, so that he
thinks of himself as the ego-doer of works; when it takes its poise in the
Akshara, it identifies itself with the Impersonal and is aware
Page 229

of Nature as the doer and itself as the inactive witnessing Self,
\s{akart\=aram}. The mind of man has to tend to one of these poises, it takes
them as alternatives; it is bound by Nature to action in the mutations of
quality and personality or it is free from her workings in immutable
impersonality.
\par But these two, the status and immutability of the Soul and the action of
the Soul and its mutability in Nature, actually coexist. And this would be an
anomaly irreconcilable except by some such theory as that of Maya or else
of a double and divided being, if there were not a supreme reality of the
Soul's existence of which these are the two contrary aspects, but which is
limited by neither of them. We have seen that the Gita finds this in the
Purushottama. The supreme Soul is the Ishwara, God, the Master of all
being, \s{sarvaloka-mahe\'svara}. He puts forth his own active nature, his
Prakriti,—\s{sv\=a\.m prak\,rtim}, says the Gita,—manifest in the Jiva, worked
out by the \s{svabh\=ava}, “own-becoming”, of each Jiva according to the law
of the divine being in it, the great lines of which each Jiva must follow, but
worked out too in the egoistic nature by the bewildering play of the three
gunas upon each other, \s{gu\,n\=a gu\,ne\,su vartante}. That is the
\s{traigu\,nyamay\=i m\=ay\=a}, the Maya hard for man to get beyond,
\s{duratyay\=a},—yet can one get beyond it by transcending the three gunas.
For while all this is done by the Ishwara through his Nature-Power in the
Kshara, in the Akshara he is untouched, indifferent, regarding all equally,
extended within all, yet above all. In all three he is the Lord, the supreme
Ishwara in the highest, the presiding and all-pervading Impersonality,
\s{prabhu} and \s{vibhu}, in the Akshara, and the immanent Will and present
active Lord in the Kshara. He is free in his impersonality even while working
out the play of his personality; he is not either merely impersonal or personal,
but one and the same being in two aspects; he is the impersonal-personal,
\s{nirgu\,no gu\,n\=i}, of the Upanishad. By him all has been willed even before it
is worked out,—as he says of the still living Dhartarashtrians, “already have
they been slain by Me,” \s{may\=a nihat\=a\,h p\=urvam eva},— and the working
out by Nature is only the result of his Will; yet by virtue of his impersonality
behind he is not bound by his works, \s{kart\=aram akart\=aram}.
Page 230

\par But man as the individual self, owing to his ignorant self-identification
with the work and the becoming, as if that were all his soul and not a power
of his soul, a power proceeding from it, is bewildered by the ego-sense. He
thinks that it is he and others who are doing all; he does not see that Nature is
doing all and that he is misrepresenting and disfiguring her works to himself
by ignorance and attachment. He is enslaved by the gunas, now hampered in
the dull case of tamas, now blown by the strong winds of rajas, now limited
by the partial lights of sattwa, not distinguishing himself at all from the
nature-mind which alone is thus modified by the gunas. He is therefore
mastered by pain and pleasure, happiness and grief, desire and passion,
attachment and disgust: he has no freedom.
\par He must, to be free, get back from the Nature action to the status of the
Akshara; he will then be \s{trigu\,n\=at\=ita}, beyond the gunas. Knowing himself
as the Akshara Brahman, the unchanging Purusha, he will know himself as
an immutable impersonal self, the Atman, tranquilly observing and impartially
supporting the action, but himself calm, indifferent, untouched, motionless,
pure, one with all beings in their self, not one with Nature and her workings.
This self, though by its presence authorising the works of Nature, though by
its all-pervading existence supporting and consenting to them, \s{prabhu
vibhu}, does not itself create works or the state of the doer or the joining of
the works to their fruit, \s{na kart\,rtva\.m na karm\=a\,ni s\,rjati na
karma-phala-sa\.myogam}, but only watches nature in the Kshara working out
these things, \s{svabh\=avas tu pravartate}; it accepts neither the sin nor the
virtue of the living creatures born into this birth as its own, \s{n\=adatte
kasyacit p\=apa\.m na caiva suk\,rtam}; it preserves its spiritual purity. It is the
ego bewildered by ignorance which attributes these things to itself, because it
assumes the responsibility of the doer and chooses to figure as that and not
as the instrument of a greater power, which is all that it really is;
\s{aj\~n\=anen\=av\,rta\.m j\~n\=ana\.m tena muhyanti jantava\,h}. By going back into the
impersonal self the soul gets back into a greater self-knowledge and is
liberated from the bondage of the works of Nature, untouched by her gunas,
free from her shows of good
Page 231

and evil, suffering and happiness. The natural being, the mind, body, life, still
remain, Nature still works; but the inner being does not identify himself with
these, nor while the gunas play in the natural being, does he rejoice or grieve.
He is the calm and free immutable Self observing all.
\par Is this the last state, the utmost possibility, the highest secret? It cannot
be, since this is a mixed or divided, not a perfectly harmonised status, a
double, not a unified being, a freedom in the soul, an imperfection in the
Nature. It can only be a stage. What then is there beyond it? One solution is
that of the Sannyasin who rejects the nature, the action altogether, so far at
least as action can be rejected, so that there may be an unmixed undivided
freedom; but this solution, though admitted, is not preferred by the Gita. The
Gita also insists on the giving up of actions, \s{sarva-karm\=a\,ni sannyasya}, but
inwardly to the Brahman. Brahman in the Kshara supports wholly the action
of Prakriti, Brahman in the Akshara, even while supporting, dissociates itself
from the action, preserves its freedom; the individual soul, unified with the
Brahman in the Akshara, is free and dissociated, yet, unified with the
Brahman in the Kshara, supports but is not affected. This it can do best when
it sees that both are aspects of the one Purushottama. The Purushottama,
inhabiting all existences as the secret Ishwara, controls the Nature and by his
will, now no longer distorted and disfigured by the ego-sense, the Nature
works out the actions by the swabhava; the individual soul makes the
divinised natural being an instrument of the divine Will, \s{nimitta-m\=atram}.
He remains even in action \s{trigu\,n\=at\=ita}, beyond the gunas, free from the
gunas, \s{nistraigu\,nya}, he fulfils entirely at last the early injunction of the
Gita, \s{nistraigu\,nyo bhav\=arjuna}. He is indeed still the enjoyer of the gunas,
as is the Brahman, though not limited by them, \s{nirgu\,na\.m gu\,nabhokt\,r ca},
unattached, yet all-supporting, even as is that Brahman, \s{asakta\.m
sarvabh\,rt}: but the action of the gunas within him is quite changed; it is lifted
above their egoistic character and reactions. For he has unified his whole
being in the Purushottama, has assumed the divine being and the higher divine
nature of becoming, \s{madbh\=ava}, has unified even his mind and natural
Page 232

consciousness with the Divine, \s{manman\=a maccitta\,h}. This change is the
final evolution of the nature and the consummation of the divine birth,
\s{rahasyam uttamam}. When it is accomplished, the soul is aware of itself
as the master of its nature and, grown a light of the divine Light and will of
the divine Will, is able to change its natural workings into a divine action.
Page 233

\par
\HN XXIII
\par
\ht Nirvana and Works in the World
\par\drop The union of the soul with the Purushottama by a Yoga of the
whole being is the complete teaching of the Gita and not only the union with
the immutable Self as in the narrower doctrine which follows the exclusive
way of knowledge. That is why the Gita subsequently, after it has effected
the reconciliation of knowledge and works, is able to develop the idea of love
and devotion, unified with both works and knowledge, as the highest height of
the way to the supreme secret. For if the union with the immutable Self were
the sole secret or the highest secret, that would not at all be possible; for then
at a given point our inner basis for love and devotion, no less than our inner
foundation of works, would crumble away and collapse. Union utter and
exclusive with the immutable Self alone means the abolition of the whole
point of view of the mutable being, not only in its ordinary and inferior action
but in its very roots, in all that makes its existence possible, not only in the
works of its ignorance, but in the works of its knowledge. It would mean the
abolition of all that difference in conscious poise and activity between the
human soul and the Divine which makes possible the play of the Kshara; for
the action of the Kshara would become then entirely a play of the ignorance
without any root or basis of divine reality in it. On the contrary, union by
Yoga with the Purushottama means the knowledge and enjoyment of our
oneness with him in our self-existent being and of a certain differentiation in
our active being. It is the persistence of the latter in a play of divine works
which are urged by the motive power of divine love and constituted by a
perfected divine Nature, it is the vision of the Divine in the world harmonised
with a realisation of the Divine in the self which makes action and devotion
possible to the liberated man, and not only possible but inevitable in the
perfect mode of his being.
Page 234

\par But the direct way to union lies through the firm realisation of the
immutable Self, and it is the Gita's insistence on this as a first necessity, after
which alone works and devotion can acquire their whole divine meaning, that
makes it possible for us to mistake its drift. For if we take the passages in
which it insists most rigorously upon this necessity and neglect to observe the
whole sequence of thought in which they stand, we may easily come to the
conclusion that it does really teach actionless absorption as the final state of
the soul and action only as a preliminary means towards stillness in the
motionless Immutable. It is in the close of the fifth and throughout the sixth
chapter that this insistence is strongest and most comprehensive. There we
get the description of a Yoga which would seem at first sight to be
incompatible with works and we get the repeated use of the word Nirvana to
describe the status to which the Yogin arrives.
\par The mark of this status is the supreme peace of a calm self-extinction,
\s{\'s\=anti\.m nirv\=a\,na-param\=am}, and, as if to make it quite clear that it is not the
Buddhist's Nirvana in a blissful negation of being, but the Vedantic loss of a
partial in a perfect being that it intends, the Gita uses always the phrase
\s{brahma-nirv\=a\,na}, extinction in the Brahman; and the Brahman here
certainly seems to mean the Immutable, to denote primarily at least the inner
timeless Self withdrawn from active participation even though immanent in
the externality of Nature. We have to see then what is the drift of the Gita
here, and especially whether this peace is the peace of an absolute inactive
cessation, whether the self-extinction in the Akshara means the absolute
excision of all knowledge and consciousness of the Kshara and of all action
in the Kshara. We are accustomed indeed to regard Nirvana and any kind of
existence and action in the world as incompatible and we might be inclined to
argue that the use of the word is by itself sufficient and decides the question.
But if we look closely at Buddhism, we shall doubt whether the absolute
incompatibility really existed even for the Buddhists; and if we look closely at
the Gita, we shall see that it does not form part of this supreme Vedantic
teaching.
\par The Gita after speaking of the perfect equality of the
Page 235

Brahman-knower who has risen into the Brahman-consciousness,
\s{brahmavid brahma\,ni sthita\,h}, develops in nine verses that follow its idea of
Brahmayoga and of Nirvana in the Brahman. “When the soul is no longer
attached to the touches of outward things,” it begins, “then one finds the
happiness that exists in the Self; such a one enjoys an imperishable happiness,
because his self is in Yoga, \s{yukta}, by Yoga with the Brahman.” The
non-attachment is essential, it says, in order to be free from the attacks of
desire and wrath and passion, a freedom without which true happiness is not
possible. That happiness and that equality are to be gained entirely by man in
the body: he is not to suffer any least remnant of the subjection to the
troubled lower nature to remain in the idea that the perfect release will come
by a putting off of the body; a perfect spiritual freedom is to be won here
upon earth and possessed and enjoyed in the human life, \s{pr\=ak
\'sar\=ira-vimok\,sa\,n\=at}. It then continues, “He who has the inner happiness and
the inner ease and repose and the inner light, that Yogin becomes the
Brahman and reaches self-extinction in the Brahman, \s{brahma-nirv\=a\,nam}.”
Here, very clearly, Nirvana means the extinction of the ego in the higher
spiritual, inner Self, that which is for ever timeless, spaceless, not bound by
the chain of cause and effect and the changes of the world-mutation,
self-blissful, self-illumined and for ever at peace. The Yogin ceases to be the
ego, the little person limited by the mind and the body; he becomes the
Brahman; he is unified in consciousness with the immutable divinity of the
eternal Self which is immanent in his natural being.
\par But is this a going in into some deep sleep of samadhi away from all
world-consciousness, or is it the preparatory movement for a dissolution of
the natural being and the individual soul into some absolute Self who is utterly
and for ever beyond Nature and her works, \s{laya}, \s{mok\,sa}? Is that
withdrawal necessary before we can enter into Nirvana, or is Nirvana, as the
context seems to suggest, a state which can exist simultaneously with
world-consciousness and even in its own way include it? Apparently the
latter, for in the succeeding verse the Gita goes on to say,
Page 236

“Sages win Nirvana in the Brahman, they in whom the stains of sin are
effaced and the knot of doubt is cut asunder, masters of their selves, who are
occupied in doing good to all creatures, \s{sarvabh\=uta-hite} \s{rat\=a\,h}.” That
would almost seem to mean that to be thus is to be in Nirvana. But the next
verse is quite clear and decisive, “\s{Yatis} (those who practise self-mastery
by Yoga and austerity) who are delivered from desire and wrath and have
gained self-mastery, for them Nirvana in the Brahman exists all about them,
encompasses them, they already live in it because they have knowledge of
the Self.” That is to say, to have knowledge and possession of the self is to
exist in Nirvana. This is clearly a large extension of the idea of Nirvana.
Freedom from all stain of the passions, the self-mastery of the equal mind on
which that freedom is founded, equality to all beings, \s{sarvabh\=ute\,su}, and
beneficial love for all, final destruction of that doubt and obscurity of the
ignorance which keeps us divided from the all-unifying Divine and the
knowledge of the One Self within us and in all are evidently the conditions of
Nirvana which are laid down in these verses of the Gita, go to constitute it
and are its spiritual substance.
\par Thus Nirvana is clearly compatible with world-consciousness and with
action in the world. For the sages who possess it are conscious of and in
intimate relation by works with the Divine in the mutable universe; they are
occupied with the good of all creatures, \s{sarvabh\=uta-hite}. They have not
renounced the experiences of the Kshara Purusha, they have divinised them;
for the Kshara, the Gita tells us, is all existences, \s{sarvabh\=ut\=ani}, and the
doing universal good to all is a divine action in the mutability of Nature. This
action in the world is not inconsistent with living in Brahman, it is rather its
inevitable condition and outward result because the Brahman in whom we
find Nirvana, the spiritual consciousness in which we lose the separative
ego-consciousness, is not only within us but within all these existences, exists
not only above and apart from all these universal happenings, but pervades
them, contains them and is extended in them. Therefore by Nirvana in the
Brahman must be meant a destruction or extinction of the limited separative
consciousness, falsifying
Page 237

and dividing, which is brought into being on the surface of existence by the
lower Maya of the three gunas, and entry into Nirvana is a passage into this
other true unifying consciousness which is the heart of existence and its
continent and its whole containing and supporting, its whole original and
eternal and final truth. Nirvana when we gain it, enter into it, is not only
within us, but all around, \s{abhito vartate}, because this is not only the
Brahman-consciousness which lives secret within us, but the
Brahman-consciousness in which we live. It is the Self which we are within,
the supreme Self of our individual being but also the Self which we are
without, the supreme Self of the universe, the self of all existences. By living
in that self we live in all, and no longer in our egoistic being alone; by oneness
with that self a steadfast oneness with all in the universe becomes the very
nature of our being and the root status of our active consciousness and root
motive of all our action.
\par But again we get immediately afterwards two verses which might seem
to lead away from this conclusion. “Having put outside of himself all outward
touches and concentrated the vision between the eyebrows and made equal
the \s{pr\=a\,na} and the \s{ap\=ana} moving within the nostrils, having controlled
the senses, the mind and the understanding, the sage devoted to liberation,
from whom desire and wrath and fear have passed away is ever free.” Here
we have a process of Yoga that brings in an element which seems quite
other than the Yoga of works and other even than the pure Yoga of
knowledge by discrimination and contemplation; it belongs in all its
characteristic features to the system, introduces the psycho-physical askesis
of Rajayoga. There is the conquest of all the movements of the mind,
\s{cittav\,rtti-nirodha}; there is the control of the breathing, Pranayama; there
is the drawing in of the sense and the vision. All of them are processes which
lead to the inner trance of Samadhi, the object of all of them \s{mok\,sa}, and
\s{mok\,sa} signifies in ordinary parlance the renunciation not only of the
separative ego-consciousness, but of the whole active consciousness, a
dissolution of our being into the highest Brahman. Are we to suppose that the
Gita gives this process in that sense as the last movement of a release by
Page 238

dissolution or only as a special means and a strong aid to overcome the
outward-going mind? Is this the finale, the climax, the last word? We shall
find reason to regard it as both a special means, an aid, and at least one gate
of a final departure, not by dissolution, but by an uplifting to the supracosmic
existence. For even here in this passage this is not the last word; the last
word, the finale, the climax comes in a verse that follows and is the last
couplet of the chapter. “When a man has known Me as the Enjoyer of
sacrifice and tapasya (of all askesis and energisms), the mighty lord of all the
worlds, the friend of all creatures, he comes by the peace.” The power of the
Karmayoga comes in again; the knowledge of the active Brahman, the
cosmic supersoul, is insisted on among the conditions of the peace of
Nirvana.
\par We get back to the great idea of the Gita, the idea of the
Purushottama,—though that name is not given till close upon the end, it is
always that which Krishna means by his “I” and “Me”, the Divine who is
there as the one self in our timeless immutable being, who is present too in
the world, in all existences, in all activities, the master of the silence and the
peace, the master of the power and the action, who is here incarnate as the
divine charioteer of the stupendous conflict, the Transcendent, the Self, the
All, the master of every individual being. He is the enjoyer of all sacrifice and
of all tapasya, therefore shall the seeker of liberation do works as a sacrifice
and as a tapasya; he is the lord of all the worlds, manifested in Nature and in
these beings, therefore shall the liberated man still do works for the right
government and leading on of the peoples in these worlds, \s{loka-sa\.ngraha};
he is the friend of all existences, therefore is the sage who has found Nirvana
within him and all around, still and always occupied with the good of all
creatures,—even as the Nirvana of Mahayana Buddhism took for its highest
sign the works of a universal compassion. Therefore too, even when he has
found oneness with the Divine in his timeless and immutable self, is he still
capable, since he embraces the relations also of the play of Nature, of divine
love for man and of love for the Divine, of bhakti.
Page 239

\par That this is the drift of the meaning, becomes clearer when we have
fathomed the sense of the sixth chapter which is a large comment on and a
full development of the idea of these closing verses of the fifth,—that shows
the importance which the Gita attaches to them. We shall therefore run as
briefly as possible through the substance of this sixth chapter. First the
Teacher emphasises—and this is very significant—his often repeated
asseveration about the real essence of Sannyasa, that it is an inward, not an
outward renunciation. “Whoever does the work to be done without resort to
its fruits, he is the Sannyasin and the Yogin, not the man who lights not the
sacrificial fire and does not the works. What they have called renunciation
(Sannyasa), know to be in truth Yoga; for none becomes a Yogin who has
not renounced the desire-will in the mind.” Works are to be done, but with
what purpose and in what order? They are first to be done while ascending
the hill of Yoga, for then works are the cause, \s{k\=ara\,nam}. The cause of
what? The cause of self-perfection, of liberation, of nirvana in the Brahman;
for by doing works with a steady practice of the inner renunciation this
perfection, this liberation, this conquest of the desire-mind and the ego-self
and the lower nature are easily accomplished.
\par But when one has got to the top? Then works are no longer the cause;
the calm of self-mastery and self-possession gained by works becomes the
cause. Again, the cause of what? Of fixity in the Self, in the
Brahman-consciousness and of the perfect equality in which the divine works
of the liberated man are done. “For when one does not get attached to the
objects of sense or to works and has renounced all will of desire in the mind,
then is he said to have ascended to the top of Yoga.” That, as we know
already, is the spirit in which the liberated man does works; he does them
without desire and attachment, without the egoistic personal will and the
mental seeking which is the parent of desire. He has conquered his lower
self, reached the perfect calm in which his highest self is manifest to him, that
highest self always concentrated in its own being, \s{sam\=ahita}, in Samadhi,
not only in the trance of the inward-drawn consciousness, but always, in the
waking state of the mind as well, in exposure to
Page 240

the causes of desire and of the disturbance of calm, to grief and pleasure,
heat and cold, honour and disgrace, all the dualities, \s{\'s\=ito\,s\,na-sukhadu\,hkhe\,su
tath\=a m\=an\=apam\=anayo\,h}. This higher self is the Akshara, \s{k\=u\,tastha}, which
stands above the changes and the perturbations of the natural being; and the
Yogin is said to be in Yoga with it when he also is like it, \s{k\=u\,tastha}, when
he is superior to all appearances and mutations, when he is satisfied with
self-knowledge, when he is equal-minded to all things and happenings and
persons.
\par But this Yoga is after all no easy thing to acquire, as Arjuna indeed
shortly afterwards suggests, for the restless mind is always liable to be pulled
down from these heights by the attacks of outward things and to fall back
into the strong control of grief and passion and inequality. Therefore, it would
seem, the Gita proceeds to give us in addition to its general method of
knowledge and works a special process of Rajayogic meditation also, a
powerful method of practice, \s{abhy\=asa}, a strong way to the complete
control of the mind and all its workings. In this process the Yogin is directed
to practise continually union with the Self so that that may become his normal
consciousness. He is to sit apart and alone, with all desire and idea of
possession banished from his mind, self-controlled in his whole being and
consciousness. “He should set in a pure spot his firm seat, neither too high,
nor yet too low, covered with a cloth, with a deer-skin, with sacred grass, and
there seated with a concentrated mind and with the workings of the mental
consciousness and the senses under control he should practise Yoga for
self-purification, \s{\=atma-vi\'suddhaye}.” The posture he takes must be the
motionless erect posture proper to the practice of Rajayoga; the vision should
be drawn in and fixed between the eye-brows, “not regarding the regions.”
The mind is to be kept calm and free from fear and the vow of
Brahmacharya observed; the whole controlled mentality must be devoted and
turned to the Divine so that the lower action of the consciousness shall be
merged in the higher peace. For the object to be attained is the still peace of
Nirvana. “Thus always putting himself in Yoga by control of his mind the
Yogin attains to the supreme peace of Nirvana which has its
Page 241

foundation in Me, \s{\'s\=anti\.m} \s{nirv\=a\,na-param\=a\.m} \s{matsa\.msth\=am}.”
\par This peace of Nirvana is reached when all the mental consciousness is
perfectly controlled and liberated from desire and remains still in the Self,
when, motionless like the light of a lamp in a windless place, it ceases from its
restless action, shut in from its outward motion, and by the silence and
stillness of the mind the Self is seen within, not disfigured as in the mind, but
in the Self, seen, not as it is mistranslated falsely or partially by the mind and
represented to us through the ego, but self-perceived by the Self,
\s{svaprak\=a\'sa}. Then the soul is satisfied and knows its own true and
exceeding bliss, not that untranquil happiness which is the portion of the mind
and the senses, but an inner and serene felicity in which it is safe from the
mind's perturbations and can no longer fall away from the spiritual truth of its
being. Not even the fieriest assault of mental grief can disturb it; for mental
grief comes to us from outside, is a reaction to external touches, and this is
the inner, the self-existent happiness of those who no longer accept the
slavery of the unstable mental reactions to external touches. It is the putting
away of the contact with pain, the divorce of the mind's marriage with grief,
\s{du\,hkha-sa\.myoga-viyogam}. The firm winning of this inalienable spiritual
bliss is Yoga, it is the divine union; it is the greatest of all gains and the
treasure beside which all others lose their value. Therefore is this Yoga to be
resolutely practised without yielding to any discouragement by difficulty or
failure until the release, until the bliss of Nirvana is secured as an eternal
possession.
\par The main stress here has fallen on the stilling of the emotive mind, the
mind of desire and the senses which are the recipients of outward touches
and reply to them with our customary emotional reactions; but even the
mental thought has to be stilled in the silence of the self-existent being. First,
all the desires born of the desire-will have to be wholly abandoned without
any exception or residue and the senses have to be held in by the mind so
that they shall not run out to all sides after their usual disorderly and restless
habit; but next the mind itself has to be seized by the buddhi and drawn
inward. One should slowly cease from mental action by a buddhi held in the
grasp of fixity
Page 242

and having fixed the mind in the higher self one should not think of anything
at all. Whenever the restless and unquiet mind goes forth, it should be
controlled and brought into subjection in the Self. When the mind is
thoroughly quieted, then there comes upon the Yogin the highest, stainless,
passionless bliss of the soul that has become the Brahman. “Thus freed from
stain of passion and putting himself constantly into Yoga, the Yogin easily and
happily enjoys the touch of the Brahman which is an exceeding bliss.”
\par And yet the result is not, while one yet lives, a Nirvana which puts away
every possibility of action in the world, every relation with beings in the
world. It would seem at first that it ought to be so. When all the desires and
passions have ceased, when the mind is no longer permitted to throw itself
out in thought, when the practice of this silent and solitary Yoga has become
the rule, what farther action or relation with the world of outward touches
and mutable appearances is any longer possible? No doubt, the Yogin for a
time still remains in the body, but the cave, the forest, the mountain-top seem
now the fittest, the only possible scene of his continued living and constant
trance of Samadhi his sole joy and occupation. But, first, while this solitary
Yoga is being pursued, the renunciation of all other action is not
recommended by the Gita. This Yoga, it says, is not for the man who gives
up sleep and food and play and action, even as it is not for those who indulge
too much in these things of the life and the body; but the sleep and waking,
the food, the play, the putting forth of effort in works should all be \s{yukta}.
This is generally interpreted as meaning that all should be moderate,
regulated, done in fit measure, and that may indeed be the significance. But
at any rate when the Yoga is attained, all this has to be \s{yukta} in another
sense, the ordinary sense of the word everywhere else in the Gita. In all
states, in waking and in sleeping, in food and play and action, the Yogin will
then be in Yoga with the Divine, and all will be done by him in the
consciousness of the Divine as the self and as the All and as that which
supports and contains his own life and his action. Desire and ego and
personal will and the thought of the
Page 243

mind are the motives of action only in the lower nature; when the ego is lost
and the Yogin becomes Brahman, when he lives in and is, even, a
transcendent and universal consciousness, action comes spontaneously out of
that, luminous knowledge higher than the mental thought comes out of that, a
power other and mightier than the personal will comes out of that to do for
him his works and bring its fruits:
\note{\s{yoga-k\,sema\.m vah\=amyaham}.} personal action has ceased, all has
been taken up into the Brahman and assumed by the Divine, \s{mayi
sannyasya karm\=a\,ni}.
\par For when the Gita describes the nature of this self-realisation and the
result of the Yoga which comes by Nirvana of the separative ego-mind and
its motives of thought and feeling and action into the Brahman-consciousness,
it includes the cosmic sense, though lifted into a new kind of vision. “The man
whose self is in Yoga, sees the self in all beings and all beings in the self, he
sees all with an equal vision.” All that he sees is to him the Self, all is his self,
all is the Divine. But is there no danger, if he dwells at all in the mutability of
the Kshara, of his losing all the results of this difficult Yoga, losing the Self
and falling back into the mind, of the Divine losing him and the world getting
him, of his losing the Divine and getting back in its place the ego and the
lower nature? No, says the Gita; “he who sees Me everywhere and sees all
in Me, to him I do not get lost, nor does he get lost to Me.” For this peace of
Nirvana, though it is gained through the Akshara, is founded upon the being
of the Purushottama, \s{mat-sa\.msth\=am}, and that is extended, the Divine, the
Brahman is extended too in the world of beings and, though transcendent of
it, not imprisoned in its own transcendence. One has to see all things as He
and live and act wholly in that vision; that is the perfect fruit of the Yoga.
\par But why act? Is it not safer to sit in one's solitude looking out upon the
world, if you will, seeing it in Brahman, in the Divine, but not taking part in it,
not moving in it, not living in it, not acting in it, living rather ordinarily in the
inner Samadhi? Should not that be the law, the rule, the dharma of this
highest spiritual
Page 244

condition? No, again; for the liberated Yogin there is no other law, rule,
dharma than simply this, to live in the Divine and love the Divine and be one
with all beings; his freedom is an absolute and not a contingent freedom,
self-existent and not dependent any longer on any rule of conduct, law of life
or limitation of any kind. He has no longer any need of a process of Yoga,
because he is now perpetually in Yoga. “The Yogin who has taken his stand
upon oneness and loves Me in all beings, however and in all ways he lives
and acts, lives and acts in Me.” The love of the world spiritualised, changed
from a sense-experience to a soul-experience, is founded on the love of God
and in that love there is no peril and no shortcoming. Fear and disgust of the
world may often be necessary for the recoil from the lower nature, for it is
really the fear and disgust of our own ego which reflects itself in the world.
But to see God in the world is to fear nothing, it is to embrace all in the being
of God; to see all as the Divine is to hate and loathe nothing, but love God in
the world and the world in God.
\par But at least the things of the lower nature will be shunned and feared,
the things which the Yogin has taken so much trouble to surmount? Not this
either; all is embraced in the equality of the self-vision. “He, O Arjuna, who
sees with equality everything in the image of the Self, whether it be grief or it
be happiness, him I hold to be the supreme Yogin.” And by this it is not
meant at all that he himself shall fall from the griefless spiritual bliss and feel
again worldly unhappiness, even in the sorrow of others, but seeing in others
the play of the dualities which he himself has left and surmounted, he shall
still see all as himself, his self in all, God in all and, not disturbed or
bewildered by the appearances of these things, moved only by them to help
and heal, to occupy himself with the good of all beings, to lead men to the
spiritual bliss, to work for the progress of the world Godwards, he shall live
the divine life, so long as days upon earth are his portion. The God-lover who
can do this, can thus embrace all things in God, can look calmly on the lower
nature and the works of the Maya of the three gunas and act in them and
upon them without perturbation or fall or disturbance from the height and
power
Page 245

of the spiritual oneness, free in the largeness of the God-vision, sweet and
great and luminous in the strength of the God-nature, may well be declared to
be the supreme Yogin. He indeed has conquered the creation, \s{jita\,h
sarga\,h}.
\par The Gita brings in here as always bhakti as the climax of the Yoga,
\s{sarvabh\=utasthita\.m yo m\=a\.m bhajati ekatvam \=asthita\,h}; that may almost be
said to sum up the whole final result of the Gita's teaching—whoever loves
God in all and his soul is founded upon the divine oneness, however he lives
and acts, lives and acts in God. And to emphasise it still more, after an
intervention of Arjuna and a reply to his doubt as to how so difficult a Yoga
can be at all possible for the restless mind of man, the divine Teacher returns
to this idea and makes it his culminating utterance. “The Yogin is greater than
the doers of askesis, greater than the men of knowledge, greater than the
men of works; become then the Yogin, O Arjuna,” the Yogin, one who seeks
for and attains, by works and knowledge and askesis or by whatever other
means, not even spiritual knowledge or power or anything else for their own
sake, but the union with God alone; for in that all else is contained and in that
lifted beyond itself to a divinest significance. But even among Yogins the
greatest is the Bhakta. “Of all Yogins he who with all his inner self given up
to Me, for Me has love and faith, \s{\'sraddh\=av\=an bhajate}, him I hold to be the
most united with Me in Yoga.” It is this that is the closing word of these first
six chapters and contains in itself the seed of the rest, of that which still
remains unspoken and is nowhere entirely spoken; for it is always and
remains something of a mystery and a secret, \s{rahasyam}, the highest
spiritual mystery and the divine secret.
Page 246

\par
\HN XXIV
\par
\ht The Gist of the Karmayoga
\par\drop The first six chapters of the Gita form a sort of preliminary block of
the teaching; all the rest, all the other twelve chapters are the working out of
certain unfinished figures in this block which here are seen only as hints
behind the large-size execution of the main motives, yet are in themselves of
capital importance and are therefore reserved for a yet larger treatment on
the other two faces of the work. If the Gita were not a great written
Scripture which must be carried to its end, if it were actually a discourse by a
living teacher to a disciple which could be resumed in good time, when the
disciple was ready for farther truth, one could conceive of his stopping here
at the end of the sixth chapter and saying, “Work this out first, there is plenty
for you to do to realise it and you have the largest possible basis; as
difficulties arise, they will solve themselves or I will solve them for you. But
at present live out what I have told you; work in this spirit.” True, there are
many things here which cannot be properly understood except in the light
thrown on them by what is to come after. In order to clear up immediate
difficulties and obviate possible misunderstandings, I have had myself to
anticipate a good deal, to bring in repeatedly, for example, the idea of the
Purushottama, for without that it would have been impossible to clear up
certain obscurities about the Self and action and the Lord of action, which the
Gita deliberately accepts so that it may not disturb the firmness of the first
steps by reaching out prematurely to things too great as yet for the mind of
the human disciple.
\par Arjuna, himself, if the Teacher were to break off his discourse here,
might well object: “You have spoken much of the destruction of desire and
attachment, of equality, of the conquest of the senses and the stilling of the
mind, of passionless and impersonal action, of the sacrifice of works, of the
inner as
Page 247

preferable to the outer renunciation, and these things I understand
intellectually, however difficult they may appear to me in practice. But you
have also spoken of rising above the gunas, while yet one remains in action,
and you have not told me how the gunas work, and unless I know that, it will
be difficult for me to detect and rise above them. Besides, you have spoken
of bhakti as the greatest element in Yoga, yet you have talked much of works
and knowledge, but very little or nothing of bhakti. And to whom is bhakti,
this greatest thing, to be offered? Not to the still impersonal Self, certainly,
but to you, the Lord. Tell me, then, what you are, who, as bhakti is greater
even than this self-knowledge, are greater than the immutable Self, which is
yet itself greater than mutable Nature and the world of action, even as
knowledge is greater than works. What is the relation between these three
things? between works and knowledge and divine love? between the soul in
Nature and the immutable Self and that which is at once the changeless Self
of all and the Master of knowledge and love and works, the supreme Divinity
who is here with me in this great battle and massacre, my charioteer in the
chariot of this fierce and terrible action?” It is to answer these questions that
the rest of the Gita is written, and in a complete intellectual solution they have
indeed to be taken up without delay and resolved. But in actual \s{s\=adhan\=a}
one has to advance from stage to stage, leaving many things, indeed the
greatest things to arise subsequently and solve themselves fully by the light of
the advance we have made in spiritual experience. The Gita follows to a
certain extent this curve of experience and puts first a sort of large
preliminary basis of works and knowledge which contains an element leading
up to bhakti and to a greater knowledge, but not yet fully arriving. The six
chapters present us with that basis.
\par We may then pause to consider how far they have carried the solution of
the original problem with which the Gita started. The problem in itself, it may
be useful again to remark, need not necessarily have led up to the whole
question of the nature of existence and of the replacement of the normal by
the spiritual life. It might have been dealt with on a pragmatical or an ethical
Page 248

basis or from an intellectual or an ideal standpoint or by a consideration of all
of these together; that in fact would have been our modern method of solving
the difficulty. By itself it raises in the first instance just this question, whether
Arjuna should be governed by the ethical sense of personal sin in slaughter or
by the consideration equally ethical of his public and social duty, the defence
of the Right, the opposition demanded by conscience from all noble natures to
the armed forces of injustice and oppression? That question has been raised
in our own time and the present hour, and it can be solved, as we solve it
now, by one or other of very various solutions, but all from the standpoint of
our normal life and our normal human mind. It may be answered as a
question between the personal conscience and our duty to the society and the
State, between an ideal and a practical morality, between “soul-force” and
the recognition of the troublesome fact that life is not yet at least all soul and
that to take up arms for the right in a physical struggle is sometimes
inevitable. All these solutions are, however, intellectual, temperamental,
emotional; they depend upon the individual standpoint and are at the best our
own proper way of meeting the difficulty offered to us, proper because
suitable to our nature and the stage of our ethical and intellectual evolution,
the best we can, with the light we have, see and do; it leads to no final
solution. And this is so because it proceeds from the normal mind which is
always a tangle of various tendencies of our being and can only arrive at a
choice or an accommodation between them, between our reason, our ethical
being, our dynamic needs, our life-instincts, our emotional being and those
rarer movements which we may perhaps call soul-instincts or psychical
preferences. The Gita recognises that from this standpoint there can be no
absolute, only an immediate practical solution and, after offering to Arjuna
from the highest ideals of his age just such a practical solution, which he is in
no mood to accept and indeed is evidently not intended to accept, it proceeds
to quite a different standpoint and to quite another answer.
\par The Gita's solution is to rise above our natural being and normal mind,
above our intellectual and ethical perplexities into
Page 249

another consciousness with another law of being and therefore another
standpoint for our action; where personal desire and personal emotions no
longer govern it; where the dualities fall away; where the action is no longer
our own and where therefore the sense of personal virtue and personal sin is
exceeded; where the universal, the impersonal, the divine spirit works out
through us its purpose in the world; where we are ourselves by a new and
divine birth changed into being of that Being, consciousness of that
Consciousness, power of that Power, bliss of that Bliss, and, living no longer
in our lower nature, have no works to do of our own, no personal aim to
pursue of our own, but if we do works at all,—and that is the one real
problem and difficulty left,—do only the divine works, those of which our
outward nature is only a passive instrument and no longer the cause, no
longer provides the motive; for the motive-power is above us in the will of the
Master of our works. And this is presented to us as the true solution, because
it goes back to the real truth of our being and to live according to the real
truth of our being is evidently the highest solution and the sole entirely true
solution of the problems of our existence. Our mental and vital personality is
a truth of our natural existence, but a truth of the ignorance, and all that
attaches itself to it is also truth of that order, practically valid for the works of
the ignorance, but no longer valid when we get back to the real truth of our
being. But how can we actually be sure that this is the truth? We cannot so
long as we remain satisfied with our ordinary mental experience; for our
normal mental experience is wholly that of this lower nature full of the
ignorance. We can only know this greater truth by living it, that is to say, by
passing beyond the mental into the spiritual experience, by Yoga. For the
living out of spiritual experience until we cease to be mind and become spirit,
until, liberated from the imperfections of our present nature, we are able to
live entirely in our true and divine being is what in the end we mean by Yoga.
\par This upward transference of our centre of being and the consequent
transformation of our whole existence and consciousness, with a resultant
change in the whole spirit and motive of
Page 250

our action, the action often remaining precisely the same in all its outward
appearances, makes the gist of the Gita's Karmayoga. Change your being, be
reborn into the spirit and by that new birth proceed with the action to which
the Spirit within has appointed you, may be said to be the heart of its
message. Or again, put otherwise, with a deeper and more spiritual
import,—make the work you have to do here your means of inner spiritual
rebirth, the divine birth, and, having become divine, do still divine works as an
instrument of the Divine for the leading of the peoples. Therefore there are
here two things which have to be clearly laid down and clearly grasped, the
way to the change, to this upward transference, this new divine birth, and the
nature of the work or rather the spirit in which it has to be done, since the
outward form of it need not at all change, although really its scope and aim
become quite different. But these two things are practically the same, for the
elucidation of one elucidates the other. The spirit of our action arises from the
nature of our being and the inner foundation it has taken, but also this nature
is itself affected by the trend and spiritual effect of our action; a very great
change in the spirit of our works changes the nature of our being and alters
the foundation it has taken; it shifts the centre of conscious force from which
we act. If life and action were entirely illusory, as some would have it, if the
Spirit had nothing to do with works or life, this would not be so; but the soul in
us develops itself by life and works and, not indeed so much the action itself,
but the way of our soul's inner force of working determines its relations to the
Spirit. This is, indeed, the justification of Karmayoga as a practical means of
the higher self-realisation.
\par We start from this foundation that the present inner life of man, almost
entirely dependent as it is upon his vital and physical nature, only lifted
beyond it by a limited play of mental energy, is not the whole of his possible
existence, not even the whole of his present real existence. There is within
him a hidden Self, of which his present nature is either only an outer
appearance or is a partial dynamic result. The Gita seems throughout to admit
its dynamic reality and not to adopt the severer view
Page 251

of the extreme Vedantists that it is only an appearance, a view which strikes
at the very roots of all works and action. Its way of formulating this element
of its philosophical thought,—it might be done in a different way,—is to admit
the Sankhya distinction between the Soul and Nature, the power that knows,
supports and informs and the power that works, acts, provides all the
variations of instrument, medium and process. Only it takes the free and
immutable Soul of the Sankhyas, calls it in Vedantic language the one
immutable omnipresent Self or Brahman, and distinguishes it from this other
soul involved in Nature, which is our mutable and dynamic being, the multiple
soul of things, the basis of variation and personality. But in what then consists
this action of Nature?
\par It consists in a power of process, Prakriti, which is the interplay of three
fundamental modes of its working, three qualities, gunas. And what is the
medium? It is the complex system of existence created by a graded evolution
of the instruments of Prakriti, which, as they are reflected here in the soul's
experience of her workings, we may call successively the reason and the
ego, the mind, the senses and the elements of material energy which are the
basis of its forms. These are all mechanical, a complex engine of Nature,
\s{yantra}; and from our modern point of view we may say that they are all
involved in material energy and manifest themselves in it as the soul in
Nature becomes aware of itself by an upward evolution of each instrument,
but in the inverse order to that which we have stated, matter first, then
sensation, then mind, next reason, last spiritual consciousness. Reason, which
is at first only preoccupied with the workings of Nature, may then detect their
ultimate character, may see them only as a play of the three gunas in which
the soul is entangled, may distinguish between the soul and these workings;
then the soul gets a chance of disentangling itself and of going back to its
original freedom and immutable existence. In Vedantic language, it sees the
spirit, the being; it ceases to identify itself with the instruments and workings
of Nature, with its becoming; it identifies itself with its true Self and being and
recovers its immutable spiritual self-existence. It is then from this spiritual
Page 252

self-existence, according to the Gita, that it can freely and as the master of its
being, the Ishwara, support the action of its becoming.
\par Looking only at the psychological facts on which these philosophical
distinctions are founded,—philosophy is only a way of formulating to
ourselves intellectually in their essential significance the psychological and
physical facts of existence and their relation to any ultimate reality that may
exist,—we may say that there are two lives we can lead, the life of the soul
engrossed in the workings of its active nature, identified with its psychological
and physical instruments, limited by them, bound by its personality, subject to
Nature, and the life of the Spirit, superior to these things, large, impersonal,
universal, free, unlimited, transcendent, supporting with an infinite equality its
natural being and action, but exceeding them by its freedom and infinity. We
may live in what is now our natural being or we may live in our greater and
spiritual being. This is the first great distinction on which the Karmayoga of
the Gita is founded.
\par The whole question and the whole method lie then in the liberation of the
soul from the limitations of our present natural being. In our natural life the
first dominating fact is our subjection to the forms of material Nature, the
outward touches of things. These present themselves to our life through the
senses, and the life through the senses immediately returns upon these
objects to seize upon them and deal with them, desires, attaches itself, seeks
for results. The mind in all its inner sensations, reactions, emotions, habitual
ways of perceiving, thinking and feeling obeys this action of the senses; the
reason too carried away by the mind gives itself up to this life of the senses,
this life in which the inner being is subject to the externality of things and
cannot for a moment really get above it or outside the circle of its action upon
us and its psychological results and reactions within us. It cannot get beyond
them because there is the principle of ego by which the reason differentiates
the sum of the action of Nature upon our mind, will, sense, body from her
action in other minds, wills, nervous organisms, bodies; and life to us means
only the way she affects our ego and the way our
Page 253

ego replies to her touches. We know nothing else, we seem to be nothing
else; the soul itself seems then only a separate mass of mind, will, emotional
and nervous reception and reaction. We may enlarge our ego, identify
ourselves with the family, clan, class, country, nation, humanity even, but still
the ego remains in all these disguises the root of our actions, only it finds a
larger satisfaction of its separate being by these wider dealings with external
things.
\par What acts in us is still the will of the natural being seizing upon the
touches of the external world to satisfy the different phases of its personality,
and the will in this seizing is always a will of desire and passion and
attachment to our works and their results, the will of Nature in us; our
personal will, we say, but our ego personality is a creation of Nature, it is not
and cannot be our free self, our independent being. The whole is the action of
the modes of Nature. It may be a tamasic action, and then we have an inert
personality subject to and satisfied with the mechanical round of things,
incapable of any strong effort at a freer action and mastery. Or it may be the
rajasic action, and then we have the restless active personality which throws
itself upon Nature and tries to make her serve its needs and desires, but does
not see that its apparent mastery is a servitude, since its needs and desires
are those of Nature, and while we are subject to them, there can be for us no
freedom. Or it may be a sattwic action, and then we have the enlightened
personality which tries to live by reason or to realise some preferred ideal of
good, truth or beauty; but this reason is still subject to the appearances of
Nature and these ideals are only changing phases of our personality in which
we find in the end no sure rule or permanent satisfaction. We are still carried
on a wheel of mutation, obeying in our circlings through the ego some Power
within us and within all this, but not ourselves that Power or in union and
communion with it. Still there is no freedom, no real mastery.
\par Yet freedom is possible. For that we have to get first away into
ourselves from the action of the external world upon our senses; that is to
say, we have to live inwardly and be able to
Page 254

hold back the natural running of the senses after their external objects. A
mastery of the senses, an ability to do without all that they hanker after, is the
first condition of the true soul-life; only so can we begin to feel that there is a
soul within us which is other than the mutations of mind in its reception of the
touches of outward things, a soul which in its depths goes back to something
self-existent, immutable, tranquil, self-possessed, grandiose, serene and
august, master of itself and unaffected by the eager runnings of our external
nature. But this cannot be done so long as we are subject to desire. For it is
desire, the principle of all our superficial life, which satisfies itself with the life
of the senses and finds its whole account in the play of the passions. We
must get rid then of desire and, that propensity of our natural being destroyed,
the passions which are its emotional results will fall into quietude; for the joy
and grief of possession and of loss, success and failure, pleasant and
unpleasant touches, which entertain them, will pass out of our souls. A calm
equality will then be gained. And since we have still to live and act in the
world and our nature in works is to seek for the fruits of our works, we must
change that nature and do works without attachment to their fruits, otherwise
desire and all its results remain. But how can we change this nature of the
doer of works in us? By dissociating works from ego and personality, by
seeing through the reason that all this is only the play of the gunas of Nature,
and by dissociating our soul from the play, by making it first of all the
observer of the workings of Nature and leaving those works to the Power
that is really behind them, the something in Nature which is greater than
ourselves, not our personality, but the Master of the universe. But the mind
will not permit all this; its nature is to run out after the senses and carry the
reason and will with it. Then we must learn to still the mind. We must attain
that absolute peace and stillness in which we become aware of the calm,
motionless, blissful Self within us which is eternally untroubled and unaffected
by the touches of things, is sufficient to itself and finds there alone its eternal
satisfaction.
\par This Self is our self-existent being. It is not limited by our
Page 255

personal existence. It is the same in all existences, pervasive, equal to all
things, supporting the whole universal action with its infinity, but unlimited by
all that is finite, unmodified by the changings of Nature and personality. When
this Self is revealed within us, when we feel its peace and stillness, we can
grow into that; we can transfer the poise of our soul from its lower
immergence in Nature and draw it back into the Self. We can do this by the
force of the things we have attained, calm, equality, passionless
impersonality. For as we grow in these things, carry them to their fullness,
subject all our nature to them, we are growing into this calm, equal,
passionless, impersonal, all-pervading Self. Our senses fall into that stillness
and receive the touches of the world on us with a supreme tranquillity; our
mind falls into stillness and becomes the calm, universal witness; our ego
dissolves itself into this impersonal existence. All things we see in this self
which we have become in ourself; and we see this self in all; we become one
being with all beings in the spiritual basis of their existence. By doing works
in this selfless tranquillity and impersonality, our works cease to be ours,
cease to bind or trouble us with their reactions. Nature and her gunas weave
the web of her works, but without affecting our griefless self-existent
tranquillity. All is given up into that one equal and universal Brahman.
\par But here there are two difficulties. First, there seems to be an antinomy
between this tranquil and immutable Self and the action of Nature. How then
does the action at all exist or how can it continue once we have entered into
the immutable Self-existence? Where in that is the will to works which would
make the action of our nature possible? If we say with the Sankhya that the
will is in Nature and not in the Self, still there must be a motive in Nature and
the power in her to draw the soul into its workings by interest, ego and
attachment, and when these things cease to reflect themselves in the
soul-consciousness, her power ceases and the motive of works ceases with
it. But the Gita does not accept this view, which seems indeed to necessitate
the existence of many Purushas and not one universal Purusha, otherwise the
separate experience of the soul and its separate
Page 256

liberation while millions of others are still involved, would not be intelligible.
Nature is not a separate principle, but the power of the Supreme going forth
in cosmic creation. But if the Supreme is only this immutable Self and the
individual is only something that has gone forth from him in the Power, then
the moment it returns and takes its poise in the self, everything must cease
except the supreme unity and the supreme calm. Secondly, even if in some
mysterious way action still continues, yet since the Self is equal to all things, it
cannot matter whether works are done or, if they are done, it cannot matter
what work is done. Why then this insistence on the most violent and
disastrous form of action, this chariot, this battle, this warrior, this divine
charioteer?
\par The Gita answers by presenting the Supreme as something greater even
than the immutable Self, more comprehensive, one who is at once this Self
and the Master of works in Nature. But he directs the works of Nature with
the eternal calm, the equality, the superiority to works and personality which
belong to the immutable. This, we may say, is the poise of being from which
he directs works, and by growing into this we are growing into his being and
into the poise of divine works. From this he goes forth as the Will and Power
of his being in Nature, manifests himself in all existences, is born as Man in
the world, is there in the heart of all men, reveals himself as the Avatar, the
divine birth in man; and as man grows into his being, it is into the divine birth
that he grows. Works must be done as a sacrifice to this Lord of our works,
and we must by growing into the Self realise our oneness with him in our
being and see our personality as a partial manifestation of him in Nature. One
with him in being, we grow one with all beings in the universe and do divine
works, not as ours, but as his workings through us for the maintenance and
leading of the peoples.
\par This is the essential thing to be done, and once this is done, the
difficulties which present themselves to Arjuna will disappear. The problem is
no longer one of our personal action, for that which makes our personality
becomes a thing temporal and subordinate, the question is then only one of
the workings of the divine Will through us in the universe. To understand that
we
Page 257

must know what this supreme Being is in himself and in Nature, what the
workings of Nature are and what they lead to, and the intimate relation
between the soul in Nature and this supreme Soul, of which bhakti with
knowledge is the foundation. The elucidation of these questions is the subject
of the rest of the Gita.
\par
\center\ftextb END OF THE FIRST SERIES
\par
Page 258

\book
\par
\ht SECOND SERIES

\part
\par
Page 259

\hn PART I
\par
\ht THE SYNTHESIS OF WORKS, LOVE AND KNOWLEDGE

\chapter
\par
Page 261

\HN I
\par
\ht The Two Natures
\note{Gita, VII. 1-14.}
\par\drop The first six chapters of the Gita have been treated as a single
block of teachings, its primary basis of practice and knowledge; the remaining
twelve may be similarly treated as two closely connected blocks which
develop the rest of the doctrine from this primary basis. The seventh to the
twelfth chapters lay down a large metaphysical statement of the nature of the
Divine Being and on that foundation closely relate and synthetise knowledge
and devotion, just as the first part of the Gita related and synthetised works
and knowledge. The vision of the World-Purusha intervenes in the eleventh
chapter, gives a dynamic turn to this stage of the synthesis and relates it
vividly to works and life. Thus again all is brought powerfully back to the
original question of Arjuna round which the whole exposition revolves and
completes its cycle. Afterwards the Gita proceeds by the differentiation of
the Purusha and Prakriti to work out its ideas of the action of the gunas, of
the ascension beyond the gunas and of the culmination of desireless works
with knowledge where that coalesces with Bhakti,—knowledge, works and
love made one,—and it rises thence to its great finale, the supreme secret of
self-surrender to the Master of Existence.
\par In this second part of the Gita we come to a more concise and easy
manner of statement than we have yet had. In the first six chapters the
definitions have not yet been made which give the key to the underlying truth;
difficulties are being met and solved; the progress is a little laboured and
moves through several involutions and returns; much is implied the bearing of
which is not yet clear. Here we seem to get on to clearer ground and to lay
hold of a more compact and pointed expression. But because of this very
conciseness we have to be careful always
Page 263

of our steps in order to avoid error and a missing of the real sense. For we
are here no longer steadily on the safe ground of psychological and spiritual
experience, but have to deal with intellectual statements of spiritual and often
of supracosmic truth. Metaphysical statement has always this peril and
uncertainty about it that it is an attempt to define to our minds what is really
infinite, an attempt which has to be made, but can never be quite satisfactory,
quite final or ultimate. The highest spiritual truth can be lived, can be seen,
but can only be partially stated. The deeper method and language of the
Upanishads with its free resort to image and symbol, its intuitive form of
speech in which the hard limiting definiteness of intellectual utterance is
broken down and the implications of words are allowed to roll out into an
illimitable wave of suggestion, is in these realms the only right method and
language. But the Gita cannot resort to this form, because it is designed to
satisfy an intellectual difficulty, answers a state of mind in which the reason,
the arbiter to which we refer the conflicts of our impulses and sentiments, is
at war with itself and impotent to arrive at a conclusion. The reason has to be
led to a truth beyond itself, but by its own means and in its own manner.
Offered a spiritually psychological solution, of the data of which it has no
experience, it can only be assured of its validity if it is satisfied by an
intellectual statement of the truths of being upon which the solution rests.
\par So far the justifying truths that have been offered to it are those with
which it is already familiar, and they are only sufficient as a starting-point.
There is first the distinction between the Self and the individual being in
Nature. The distinction has been used to point out that this individual being in
Nature is necessarily subject, so long as he lives shut up within the action of
the ego, to the workings of the three gunas which make up by their unstable
movements the whole scope and method of the reason, the mind and the life
and senses in the body. And within this circle there is no solution. Therefore
the solution has to be found by an ascent out of the circle, above this nature
of the gunas, to the one immutable Self and silent Spirit, because then one
gets beyond that action of the ego and desire which
Page 264

is the whole root of the difficulty. But since this by itself seems to lead
straight towards inaction, as beyond Nature there is no instrumentality of
action and no cause or determinant of action,—for the immutable self is
inactive, impartial and equal to all things, all workings and all
happenings,—the Yoga idea is brought in of the Ishwara, the Divine as
master of works and sacrifice, and it is hinted but not yet expressly stated
that this Divine exceeds even the immutable self and that in him lies the key
to cosmic existence. Therefore by rising to him through the Self it is possible
to have spiritual freedom from our works and yet to continue in the works of
Nature. But it has not yet been stated who is this Supreme, incarnate here in
the divine teacher and charioteer of works, or what are his relations to the
Self and to the individual being in Nature. Nor is it clear how the Will to
works coming from him can be other than the will in the nature of the three
gunas. And if it is only that, then the soul obeying it can hardly fail to be in
subjection to the gunas in its action, if not in its spirit, and if so, at once the
freedom promised becomes either illusory or incomplete. Will seems to be an
aspect of the executive part of being, to be power and active force of nature,
Shakti, Prakriti. Is there then a higher Nature than that of the three gunas? Is
there a power of pragmatic creation, will, action other than that of ego,
desire, mind, sense, reason and the vital impulse?
\par Therefore, in this uncertainty, what has now to be done is to give more
completely the knowledge on which divine works are to be founded. And this
can only be the complete, the integral knowledge of the Divine who is the
source of works and in whose being the worker becomes by knowledge free;
for he knows the free Spirit from whom all works proceed and participates in
his freedom. Moreover this knowledge must bring a light that justifies the
assertion with which the first part of the Gita closes. It must ground the
supremacy of bhakti over all other motives and powers of spiritual
consciousness and action; it must be a knowledge of the supreme Lord of all
creatures to whom alone the soul can offer itself in the perfect self-surrender
which is the highest height of all love and devotion. This is what the
Page 265

Teacher proposes to give in the opening verses of the seventh chapter which
initiate the development that occupies all the rest of the book. “Hear,” he
says, “how by practising Yoga with a mind attached to me and with me as
\s{\=a\'sraya} (the whole basis, lodgment, point of resort of the conscious being
and action) thou shalt know me without any remainder of doubt, integrally,
\s{samagra\.m m\=am}. I will speak to thee without omission or remainder,
\s{a\'se\,sata\,h},” (for otherwise a ground of doubt may remain), “the essential
knowledge, attended with all the comprehensive knowledge, by knowing
which there shall be no other thing here left to be known.” The implication of
the phrase is that the Divine Being is all, \s{v\=asudeva\,h sarvam}, and
therefore if he is known integrally in all his powers and principles, then all is
known, not only the pure Self, but the world and action and Nature. There is
then nothing else here left to be known, because all is that Divine Existence.
It is only because our view here is not thus integral, because it rests on the
dividing mind and reason and the separative idea of the ego, that our mental
perception of things is an ignorance. We have to get away from this mental
and egoistic view to the true unifying knowledge, and that has two aspects,
the essential, \s{j\~n\=ana}, and the comprehensive, \s{vij\~n\=ana}, the direct
spiritual awareness of the supreme Being and the right intimate knowledge of
the principles of his existence, Prakriti, Purusha and the rest, by which all that
is can be known in its divine origin and in the supreme truth of its nature.
That integral knowledge, says the Gita, is a rare and difficult thing; “among
thousands of men one here and there strives after perfection, and of those
who strive and attain to perfection one here and there knows me in all the
principles of my existence, \s{tattvata\,h}.”
\par Then, to start with and in order to found this integral knowledge, the Gita
makes that deep and momentous distinction which is the practical basis of all
its Yoga, the distinction between the two Natures, the phenomenal and the
spiritual Nature. “The five elements (conditions of material being), mind,
reason, ego, this is my eightfold divided Nature. But know my other Nature
different from this, the supreme which becomes the Jiva and by which this
world is upheld.” Here is the first new metaphysical
Page 266

idea of the Gita which helps it to start from the notions of the Sankhya
philosophy and yet exceed them and give to their terms, which it keeps and
extends, a Vedantic significance. An eightfold Nature constituted of the five
\s{bh\=utas},—elements, as it is rendered, but rather elemental or essential
conditions of material being to which are given the concrete names of earth,
water, fire, air and ether,—the mind with its various senses and organs, the
reason-will and the ego, is the Sankhya description of Prakriti. The Sankhya
stops there, and because it stops there, it has to set up an unbridgeable
division between the soul and Nature; it has to posit them as two quite distinct
primary entities. The Gita also, if it stopped there, would have to make the
same incurable antinomy between the Self and cosmic Nature which would
then be only the Maya of the three gunas and all this cosmic existence would
be simply the result of this Maya; it could be nothing else. But there is
something else, there is a higher principle, a nature of spirit, \s{par\=a prak\,rtir}
\s{me}. There is a supreme nature of the Divine which is the real source of
cosmic existence and its fundamental creative force and effective energy and
of which the other lower and ignorant Nature is only a derivation and a dark
shadow. In this highest dynamis Purusha and Prakriti are one. Prakriti there
is only the will and the executive power of the Purusha, his activity of
being,—not a separate entity, but himself in Power.
\par This supreme Prakriti is not merely a presence of the power of spiritual
being immanent in cosmic activities. For then it might be only the inactive
presence of the all-pervading Self, immanent in all things or containing them,
compelling in a way the world action but not itself active. Nor is this highest
Prakriti the \s{avyakta} of the Sankhyas, the primary unmanifest seed-state
of the manifest active eightfold nature of things, the one productive original
force of Prakriti out of which her many instrumental and executive powers
evolve. Nor is it sufficient to interpret that idea of \s{avyakta} in the
Vedantic sense and say that this supreme Nature is the power involved and
inherent in unmanifest Spirit or Self out of which cosmos comes and into
which it returns. It is that, but it is much more; for that is only one of its
spiritual states. It is the integral conscious-power of the supreme Being,
Page 267

\s{cit-\'sakti}, which is behind the self and cosmos. In the immutable Self it is
involved in the Spirit; it is there, but in \s{niv\,rtti} or a holding back from
action: in the mutable self and the cosmos it comes out into action,
\s{prav\,rtti}. There by its dynamic presence it evolves in the Spirit all
existences and appears in them as their essential spiritual nature, the
persistent truth behind their play of subjective and objective phenomena. It is
the essential quality and force, \s{svabh\=ava}, the self-principle of all their
becoming, the inherent principle and divine power behind their phenomenal
existence. The balance of the gunas is only a quantitative and quite derivative
play evolved out of this supreme Principle. All this activity of forms, all this
mental, sensuous, intelligential striving of the lower nature is only a
phenomenon, which could not be at all except for this spiritual force and this
power of being; it comes from that and it exists in that and by that solely. If
we dwell in the phenomenal nature only and see things only by the notions it
impresses on us, we shall not get at the real truth of our active existence. The
real truth is this spiritual power, this divine force of being, this essential quality
of the spirit in things or rather of the spirit in which things are and from which
they draw all their potencies and the seeds of their movements. Get at that
truth, power, quality and we shall get at the real law of our becoming and the
divine principle of our living, its source and sanction in the Knowledge and not
only its process in the Ignorance.
\par This is to throw the sense of the Gita into language suited to our modern
way of thinking; but if we look at its description of the Para Prakriti, we shall
find that this is practically the substance of what it says. For first, this other
higher Prakriti is, says Krishna, my supreme nature, \s{prak\,rti\.m me par\=am}.
And this “I” here is the Purushottama, the supreme Being, the supreme Soul,
the transcendent and universal Spirit. The original and eternal nature of the
Spirit and its transcendent and originating Shakti is what is meant by the Para
Prakriti. For speaking first of the origin of the world from the point of view of
the active power of his Nature, Krishna assevers, “This is the womb of all
beings,” \s{etad-yon\=ini bh\=ut\=ani}. And in the next line of the couplet, again
Page 268

stating the same fact from the point of view of the originating Soul, he
continues, “I am the birth of the whole world and so too its dissolution; there
is nothing else supreme beyond Me.” Here then the supreme Soul,
Purushottama, and the supreme Nature, Para Prakriti, are identified: they are
put as two ways of looking at one and the same reality. For when Krishna
declares, I am the birth of the world and its dissolution, it is evident that it is
this Para Prakriti, supreme Nature, of his being which is both these things.
The Spirit is the supreme Being in his infinite consciousness and the supreme
Nature is the infinity of power or will of being of the Spirit,—it is his infinite
consciousness in its inherent divine energy and its supernal divine action. The
birth is the movement of evolution of this conscious Energy out of the Spirit,
\s{par\=a prak\,rtir j\=ivabh\=ut\=a}, its activity in the mutable universe; the dissolution
is the withdrawing of that activity by involution of the Energy into the
immutable existence and self-gathered power of the Spirit. That then is what
is initially meant by the supreme Nature.
\par The supreme Nature, \s{par\=a prak\,rti\,h}, is then the infinite timeless
conscious power of the self-existent Being out of which all existences in the
cosmos are manifested and come out of timelessness into Time. But in order
to provide a spiritual basis for this manifold universal becoming in the cosmos
the supreme Nature formulates itself as the Jiva. To put it otherwise, the
eternal multiple soul of the Purushottama appears as individual spiritual
existence in all the forms of the cosmos. All existences are instinct with the
life of the one indivisible Spirit; all are supported in their personality, actions
and forms by the eternal multiplicity of the one Purusha. We must be careful
not to make the mistake of thinking that this supreme Nature is identical with
the Jiva manifested in Time in the sense that there is nothing else or that it is
only nature of becoming and not at all nature of being: that could not be the
supreme nature of the Spirit. Even in Time it is something more; for
otherwise the only truth of it in the cosmos would be nature of multiplicity and
there would be no nature of unity in the world. That is not what the Gita says:
it does not say that the supreme Prakriti is in its essence the
Page 269

Jiva, \s{j\=iv\=atmik\=am}, but that it has become the Jiva, \s{j\=ivabh\=ut\=am}; and it is
implied in that expression that behind its manifestation as the Jiva here it is
originally something else and higher, it is nature of the one supreme spirit.
The Jiva, as we are told later on, is the Lord, \s{\=i\'svara}, but in his partial
manifestation, \s{mamaiv\=a\.m\'sa\,h}; even all the multiplicity of beings in the
universe or in numberless universes could not be in their becoming the
integral Divine, but only a partial manifestation of the infinite One. In them
Brahman the one indivisible existence resides as if divided, \s{avibhakta\.m ca
bh\=ute\,su vibhaktam iva ca sthitam}. The unity is the greater truth, the
multiplicity is the lesser truth, though both are a truth and neither of them is
an illusion.
\par It is by the unity of this spiritual nature that the world is sustained,
\s{yayeda\.m dh\=aryate jagat}, even as it is that from which it is born with all its
becomings, \s{etad-yon\=ini bh\=ut\=ani sarv\=a\,ni}, and that also which withdraws
the whole world and its existences into itself in the hour of dissolution,
\s{aha\.m k\,rtsnasya jagata\,h prabhava\,h pralayas tath\=a}. But in the
manifestation which is thus put forth in the Spirit, upheld in its action,
withdrawn in its periodical rest from action, the Jiva is the basis of the
multiple existence; it is the multiple soul, if we may so call it, or, if we prefer,
the soul of the multiplicity we experience here. It is one always with the
Divine in its being, different from it only in the power of its being,—different
not in the sense that it is not at all the same power, but in this sense that it
only supports the one power in a partial multiply individualised action.
Therefore all things are initially, ultimately and in the principle of their
continuance too the Spirit. The fundamental nature of all is nature of the
Spirit, and only in their lower differential phenomena do they seem to be
something else, to be nature of body, life, mind, reason, ego and the senses.
But these are phenomenal derivatives, they are not the essential truth of our
nature and our existence.
\par The supreme nature of spiritual being gives us then both an original truth
and power of existence beyond cosmos and a first basis of spiritual truth for
the manifestation in the cosmos. But where is the link between this supreme
nature and the lower
Page 270

phenomenal nature? On me, says Krishna, all this, all that is here—\s{sarvam
idam}, the common phrase in the Upanishads for the totality of phenomena in
the mobility of the universe—is strung like pearls upon a thread. But this is
only an image which we cannot press very far; for the pearls are only kept in
relation to each other by the thread and have no other oneness or relation
with the pearl-string except their dependence on it for this mutual connection.
Let us go then from the image to that which it images. It is the supreme
nature of Spirit, the infinite conscious power of its being, self-conscient,
all-conscient, all-wise, which maintains these phenomenal existences in
relation to each other, penetrates them, abides in and supports them and
weaves them into the system of its manifestation. This one supreme power
manifests not only in all as the One, but in each as the Jiva, the individual
spiritual presence; it manifests also as the essence of all quality of Nature.
These are therefore the concealed spiritual powers behind all phenomena.
This highest quality is not the working of the three gunas, which is
phenomenon of quality and not its spiritual essence. It is rather the inherent,
one, yet variable inner power of all these superficial variations. It is a
fundamental truth of the Becoming, a truth that supports and gives a spiritual
and divine significance to all its appearances. The workings of the gunas are
only the superficial unstable becomings of reason, mind, sense, ego, life and
matter, \s{s\=attvik\=a bh\=av\=a r\=ajas\=as t\=amas\=a\'s ca}; but this is rather the essential
stable original intimate power of the becoming, \s{svabh\=ava}. It is that which
determines the primary law of all becoming and of each Jiva; it constitutes
the essence and develops the movement of the nature. It is a principle in
each creature that derives from and is immediately related to a transcendent
divine Becoming, that of the Ishwara, \s{madbh\=ava\,h}. In this relation of the
divine \s{bh\=ava} to the \s{svabh\=ava} and of the \s{svabh\=ava} to the
superficial \s{bh\=av\=a\,h}, of the divine Nature to the individual self-nature and
of the self-nature in its pure and original quality to the phenomenal nature in
all its mixed and confused play of qualities, we find the link between that
supreme and this lower existence. The degraded powers and values of the
inferior Prakriti derive from
Page 271

the absolute powers and values of the supreme Shakti and must go back to
them to find their own source and truth and the essential law of their
operation and movement. So too the soul or Jiva involved here in the
shackled, poor and inferior play of the phenomenal qualities, if he would
escape from it and be divine and perfect, must by resort to the pure action of
his essential quality of Swabhava go back to that higher law of his own being
in which he can discover the will, the power, the dynamic principle, the
highest working of his divine nature.
\par This is clear from the immediately subsequent passage in which the Gita
gives a number of instances to show how the Divine in the power of his
supreme nature manifests and acts within the animate and so-called
inanimate existences of the universe. We may disentangle them from the
loose and free order which the exigence of the poetical form imposes and put
them in their proper philosophical series. First, the divine Power and
Presence works within the five elemental conditions of matter. “I am taste in
the waters, sound in ether, scent in earth, energy of light in fire,” and, it may
be added for more completeness, touch or contact in air. That is to say, the
Divine himself in his Para Prakriti is the energy at the basis of the various
sensory relations of which, according to the ancient Sankhya system, the
ethereal, the radiant, electric and gaseous, the liquid and the other elemental
conditions of matter are the physical medium. The five elemental conditions
of matter are the quantitative or material element in the lower nature and are
the basis of material forms. The five Tanmatras—taste, touch, scent, and the
others—are the qualitative element. These Tanmatras are the subtle energies
whose action puts the sensory consciousness in relation to the gross forms of
matter,—they are the basis of all phenomenal knowledge. From the material
point of view matter is the reality and the sensory relations are derivative; but
from the spiritual point of view the truth is the opposite. Matter and the
material media are themselves derivative powers and at bottom are only
concrete ways or conditions in which the workings of the quality of Nature in
things manifest themselves to the sensory consciousness of the Jiva. The one
original and
Page 272

eternal fact is the energy of Nature, the power and quality of being which so
manifests itself to the soul through the senses. And what is essential in the
senses, most spiritual, most subtle is itself stuff of that eternal quality and
power. But energy or power of being in Nature is the Divine himself in his
Prakriti; each sense in its purity is therefore that Prakriti, each sense is the
Divine in his dynamic conscious force.
\par This we gather better from the other terms of the series. “I am the light
of sun and moon, the manhood in man, the intelligence of the intelligent, the
energy of the energetic, the strength of the strong, the ascetic force of those
who do askesis, \s{tapasy\=a}.” “I am life in all existences.” In each case it is
the energy of the essential quality on which each of these becomings depends
for what it has become, that is given as the characteristic sign indicating the
presence of the divine Power in their nature. Again, “I am pranava in all the
Vedas,” that is to say, the basic syllable OM, which is the foundation of all
the potent creative sounds of the revealed word; OM is the one universal
formulation of the energy of sound and speech, that which contains and sums
up, synthetises and releases all the spiritual power and all the potentiality of
Vak and Shabda and of which the other sounds, out of whose stuff words of
speech are woven, are supposed to be the developed evolutions. That makes
it quite clear. It is not the phenomenal developments of the senses or of life
or of light, intelligence, energy, strength, manhood, ascetic force that are
proper to the supreme Prakriti. It is the essential quality in its spiritual power
that constitutes the Swabhava. It is the force of spirit so manifesting, it is the
light of its consciousness and the power of its energy in things revealed in a
pure original sign that is the self-nature. That force, light, power is the eternal
seed from which all other things are the developments and derivations and
variabilities and plastic circumstances. Therefore the Gita throws in as the
most general statement in the series, “Know me to be the eternal seed of all
existences, O son of Pritha.” This eternal seed is the power of spiritual being,
the conscious will in the being, the seed which, as is said elsewhere, the
Divine casts into the great Brahman, into the supramental vastness,
Page 273

and from that all are born into phenomenal existence. It is that seed of spirit
which manifests itself as the essential quality in all becomings and constitutes
their swabhava.
\par The practical distinction between this original power of essential quality
and the phenomenal derivations of the lower nature, between the thing itself
in its purity and the thing in its lower appearances, is indicated very clearly at
the close of the series. “I am the strength of the strong devoid of desire and
liking,” stripped of all attachment to the phenomenal pleasure of things. “I am
in beings the desire which is not contrary to their dharma.” And as for the
secondary subjective becomings of Nature, \s{bh\=av\=a\,h} (states of mind,
affections of desire, movements of passion, the reactions of the senses, the
limited and dual play of reason, the turns of the feeling and moral sense),
which are sattwic, rajasic and tamasic, as for the working of the three gunas,
they are, says the Gita, not themselves the pure action of the supreme
spiritual nature, but are derivations from it; “they are verily from me,”
\s{matta eva}, they have no other origin, “but I am not in them, it is they that
are in me.” Here is indeed a strong and yet subtle distinction. “I am” says the
Divine “the essential light, strength, desire, power, intelligence, but these
derivations from them I am not in my essence, nor am I in them, yet are they
all of them from me and they are all in my being.” It is then upon the basis of
these statements that we have to view the transition of things from the higher
to the lower and again from the lower back to the higher nature.
\par The first statement offers no difficulty. The strong man in spite of the
divine nature of the principle of strength in him falls into subjection to desire
and to attachment, stumbles into sin, struggles towards virtue. But that is
because he descends in all his derivative action into the grasp of the three
gunas and does not govern that action from above, from his essential divine
nature. The divine nature of his strength is not affected by these derivations,
it remains the same in its essence in spite of every obscuration and every
lapse. The Divine is there in that nature and supports him by its strength
through the confusions of his lower existence till he is able to recover the
light, illumine wholly
Page 274

his life with the true sun of his being and govern his will and its acts by the
pure power of the divine will in his higher nature. But how can the Divine be
desire, \s{k\=ama}? for this desire, this \s{k\=ama} has been declared to be our
one great enemy who has to be slain. But that desire was the desire of the
lower nature of the gunas which has its native point of origin in the rajasic
being, \s{rajogu\,na-samudbhava\,h}; for this is what we usually mean when we
speak of desire. This other, the spiritual, is a will not contrary to the dharma.
\par Is it meant that the spiritual \s{k\=ama} is a virtuous desire, ethical in its
nature, a sattwic desire,—for virtue is always sattwic in its origin and motive
force? But then there would be here an obvious contradiction,—since in the
very next line all sattwic affections are declared to be not the Divine, but only
lower derivations. Undoubtedly sin has to be abandoned if one is to get
anywhere near the Godhead; but so too has virtue to be overpassed if we are
to enter into the Divine Being. The sattwic nature has to be attained, but it
has then to be exceeded. Ethical action is only a means of purification by
which we can rise towards the divine nature, but that nature itself is lifted
beyond the dualities,—and indeed there could otherwise be no pure divine
presence or divine strength in the strong man who is subjected to the rajasic
passions. Dharma in the spiritual sense is not morality or ethics. Dharma,
says the Gita elsewhere, is action governed by the swabhava, the essential
law of one's nature. And this swabhava is at its core the pure quality of the
spirit in its inherent power of conscious will and in its characteristic force of
action. The desire meant here is therefore the purposeful will of the Divine in
us searching for and discovering not the pleasure of the lower Prakriti, but
the Ananda of its own play and self-fulfilling; it is the desire of the divine
Delight of existence unrolling its own conscious force of action in accordance
with the law of the swabhava.
\par But what again is meant by saying that the Divine is not in the
becomings, the forms and affections of the lower nature, even the sattwic,
though they all are in his being? In a sense he must evidently be in them,
otherwise they could not exist. But
Page 275

what is meant is that the true and supreme spiritual nature of the Divine is not
imprisoned there; they are only phenomena in his being created out of it by
the action of the ego and the ignorance. The ignorance presents everything to
us in an inverted vision and at least a partially falsified experience. We
imagine that the soul is in the body, almost a result and derivation from the
body; even we so feel it: but it is the body that is in the soul and a result and
derivation from the soul. We think of the spirit as a small part of us—the
Purusha who is no bigger than the thumb—in this great mass of material and
mental phenomena: in reality, the latter for all its imposing appearance is a
very small thing in the infinity of the being of the spirit. So it is here; in much
the same sense these things are in the Divine rather than the Divine in these
things. This lower nature of the three gunas which creates so false a view of
things and imparts to them an inferior character is a Maya, a power of
illusion, by which it is not meant that it is all non-existent or deals with
unrealities, but that it bewilders our knowledge, creates false values, envelops
us in ego, mentality, sense, physicality, limited intelligence and there conceals
from us the supreme truth of our existence. This illusive Maya hides from us
the Divine that we are, the infinite and imperishable spirit. “By these three
kinds of becoming which are of the nature of the gunas, this whole world is
bewildered and does not recognise Me supreme beyond them and
imperishable.” If we could see that that Divine is the real truth of our
existence, all else also would change to our vision, assume its true character
and our life and action acquire the divine values and move in the law of the
divine nature.
\par But why then, since the Divine is there after all and the divine nature at
the root even of these bewildering derivations, since we are the Jiva and the
Jiva is that, is this Maya so hard to overcome, \s{m\=ay\=a duratyay\=a}? Because
it is still the Maya of the Divine, \s{daiv\=i hye\,s\=a gu\,namay\=i mama m\=ay\=a}; “this
is my divine Maya of the gunas.” It is itself divine and a development from
the nature of the Divine, but the Divine in the nature of the gods; it is
\s{daiv\=i}, of the godheads or, if you will, of the Godhead, but of the Godhead
in its divided subjective and lower cosmic aspects,
Page 276

sattwic, rajasic and tamasic. It is a cosmic veil which the Godhead has spun
around our understanding; Brahma, Vishnu and Rudra have woven its
complex threads; the Shakti, the Supreme Nature is there at its base and is
hidden in its every tissue. We have to work out this web in ourselves and turn
through it and from it leaving it behind us when its use is finished, turn from
the gods to the original and supreme Godhead in whom we shall discover at
the same time the last sense of the gods and their works and the inmost
spiritual verities of our own imperishable existence. “To Me who turn and
come, they alone cross over beyond this Maya.”
Page 277

\par
\HN II
\par
\ht The Synthesis of\nl Devotion and Knowledge
\note{Gita, VII. 15-28.}
\par\drop The Gita is not a treatise of metaphysical philosophy, in spite of the
great mass of metaphysical ideas which arise incidentally in its pages; for
here no metaphysical truth is brought into expression solely for its own sake.
It seeks the highest truth for the highest practical utility, not for intellectual or
even for spiritual satisfaction, but as the truth that saves and opens to us the
passage from our present mortal imperfection to an immortal perfection.
Therefore after giving us in the first fourteen verses of this chapter a leading
philosophical truth of which we stand in need, it hastens in the next sixteen
verses to make an immediate application of it. It turns it into a first
starting-point for the unification of works, knowledge and devotion,—for the
preliminary synthesis of works and knowledge by themselves has already
been accomplished.
\par We have before us three powers, the Purushottama as the supreme truth
of that into which we have to grow, the Self and the Jiva. Or, as we may put
it, there is the Supreme, there is the impersonal spirit, and there is the multiple
soul, timeless foundation of our spiritual personality, the true and eternal
individual, \s{mamaiv\=a\.m\'sa\,h san\=atana\,h}. All these three are divine, all three
are the Divine. The supreme spiritual nature of being, the Para Prakriti free
from any limitation by the conditioning Ignorance, is the nature of the
Purushottama. In the impersonal Self there is the same divine nature, but
here it is in its state of eternal rest, equilibrium, inactivity, nivritti. Finally, for
activity, for pravritti, the Para Prakriti becomes the multiple spiritual
personality, the Jiva. But the intrinsic activity of this supreme
Page 278

Nature is always a spiritual, a divine working. It is force of the supreme
divine Nature, it is the conscious will of the being of the Supreme that throws
itself out in various essential and spiritual power of quality in the Jiva: that
essential power is the swabhava of the Jiva. All act and becoming which
proceed directly from this spiritual force are a divine becoming and a pure
and spiritual action. Therefore it follows that in action the effort of the human
individual must be to get back to his true spiritual personality and to make all
his works flow from the power of its supernal Shakti, to develop action
through the soul and the inmost intrinsic being, not through the mental idea
and vital desire, and to turn all his acts into a pure outflowing of the will of the
Supreme, all his life into a dynamic symbol of the Divine Nature.
\par But there is also this lower nature of the three gunas whose character is
the character of the ignorance and whose action is the action of the
ignorance, mixed, confused, perverted; it is the action of the lower
personality, of the ego, of the natural and not of the spiritual individual. It is in
order to recede from that false personality that we have to resort to the
impersonal Self and make ourselves one with it. Then, freed so from the ego
personality, we can find the relation of the true individual to the
Purushottama. It is one with him in being, even though necessarily partial and
determinative, because individual, in action and temporal manifestation of
nature. Freed too from the lower nature we can realise the higher, the divine,
the spiritual. Therefore to act from the soul does not mean to act from the
desire soul; for that is not the high intrinsic being, but only the lower natural
and superficial appearance. To act in accordance with the intrinsic nature,
the swabhava, does not mean to act out of the passions of the ego, to enact
with indifference or with desire sin and virtue according to the natural
impulses and the unstable play of the gunas. Yielding to passion, an active or
an inert indulgence of sin is no way either to the spiritual quietism of the
highest impersonality or to the spiritual activity of the divine individual who is
to be a channel for the will of the supreme Person, a direct power and visible
becoming of the Purushottama.
Page 279

\par The Gita has laid it down from the beginning that the very first
precondition of the divine birth, the higher existence is the slaying of rajasic
desire and its children, and that means the exclusion of sin. Sin is the working
of the lower nature for the crude satisfaction of its own ignorant, dull or
violent rajasic and tamasic propensities in revolt against any high self-control
and self-mastery of the nature by the spirit. And in order to get rid of this
crude compulsion of the being by the lower Prakriti in its inferior modes we
must have recourse to the highest mode of that Prakriti, the sattwic, which is
seeking always for a harmonious light of knowledge and for a right rule of
action. The Purusha, the soul within us which assents in Nature to the
varying impulse of the gunas, has to give its sanction to that sattwic impulse
and that sattwic will and temperament in our being which seeks after such a
rule. The sattwic will in our nature has to govern us and not the rajasic and
tamasic will. This is the meaning of all high reason in action as of all true
ethical culture; it is the law of Nature in us striving to evolve from her lower
and disorderly to her higher and orderly action, to act not in passion and
ignorance with the result of grief and unquiet, but in knowledge and
enlightened will with the result of inner happiness, poise and peace. We
cannot get beyond the three gunas, if we do not first develop within ourselves
the rule of the highest guna, sattwa.
\par “The evil-doers attain not to me,” says the Purushottama, “souls
bewildered, low in the human scale; for their knowledge is reft away from
them by Maya and they resort to the nature of being of the Asura.” This
bewilderment is a befooling of the soul in Nature by the deceptive ego. The
evil-doer cannot attain to the Supreme because he is for ever trying to satisfy
the idol ego on the lowest scale of human nature; his real God is this ego. His
mind and will, hurried away in the activities of the Maya of the three gunas,
are not instruments of the spirit, but willing slaves or self-deceived tools of his
desires. He sees this lower nature only and not his supreme self and highest
being or the Godhead within himself and in the world: he explains all
existence to his will in the terms of ego and desire and serves only ego and
desire. To serve ego and desire without aspiration
Page 280

to a higher nature and a higher law is to have the mind and the temperament
of the Asura. A first necessary step upward is to aspire to a higher nature
and a higher law, to obey a better rule than the rule of desire, to perceive and
worship a nobler godhead than the ego or than any magnified image of the
ego, to become a right thinker and a right doer. This too is not in itself
enough; for even the sattwic man is subject to the bewilderment of the gunas,
because he is still governed by wish and disliking, \s{icch\=a-dve\,sa}. He moves
within the circle of the forms of Nature and has not the highest, not the
transcendental and integral knowledge. Still by the constant upward aspiration
in his ethical aim he in the end gets rid of the obscuration of sin which is the
obscuration of rajasic desire and passion and acquires a purified nature
capable of deliverance from the rule of the triple Maya. By virtue alone man
cannot attain to the highest, but by virtue
\note{Obviously, by the true inner \s{pu\,nya}, a sattwic clarity in thought,
feeling, temperament, motive and conduct, not a merely conventional or social
virtue.} he can develop a first capacity for attaining to it, \s{adhik\=ara}. For
the crude rajasic or the dull tamasic ego is difficult to shake off and put below
us; the sattwic ego is less difficult and at last, when it sufficiently subtilises
and enlightens itself, becomes even easy to transcend, transmute or
annihilate.
\par Man, therefore, has first of all to become ethical, \s{suk\,rt\=i}, and then to
rise to heights beyond any mere ethical rule of living, to the light, largeness
and power of the spiritual nature, where he gets beyond the grasp of the
dualities and its delusion, \s{dvandva-moha}. There he no longer seeks his
personal good or pleasure or shuns his personal suffering or pain, for by these
things he is no longer affected, nor says any longer, “I am virtuous,” “I am
sinful,” but acts in his own high spiritual nature by the will of the Divine for
the universal good. We have already seen that for this end self-knowledge,
equality, impersonality are the first necessities, and that that is the way of
reconciliation between knowledge and works, between spirituality and activity
in the world, between the ever immobile quietism of the timeless self and the
eternal play of the pragmatic energy of Nature. But
Page 281

the Gita now lays down another and greater necessity for the Karmayogin
who has unified his Yoga of works with the Yoga of knowledge. Not
knowledge and works alone are demanded of him now, but \s{bhakti} also,
devotion to the Divine, love and adoration and the soul's desire of the
Highest. This demand, not expressly made until now, had yet been prepared
when the Teacher laid down as the necessary turn of his Yoga the
conversion of all works into a sacrifice to the Lord of our being and fixed as
its culmination the giving up of all works, not only into our impersonal Self, but
through impersonality into the Being from whom all our will and power
originate. What was there implied is now brought out and we begin to see
more fully the Gita's purpose.
\par We have now set before us three interdependent movements of our
release out of the normal nature and our growth into the divine and spiritual
being. “By the delusion of the dualities which arises from wish and disliking,
all existences in the creation are led into bewilderment,” says the Gita. That
is the ignorance, the egoism which fails to see and lay hold on the Divine
everywhere, because it sees only the dualities of Nature and is constantly
occupied with its own separate personality and its seekings and shrinkings.
For escape from this circle the first necessity in our works is to get clear of
the sin of the vital ego, the fire of passion, the tumult of desire of the rajasic
nature, and this has to be done by the steadying sattwic impulse of the ethical
being. When that is done, \s{ye\,s\=a\.m tvantagata\.m p\=apa\.m jan\=an\=a\.m
pu\,nyakarma\,n\=am},—or rather as it is being done, for after a certain point all
growth in the sattwic nature brings an increasing capacity for a high quietude,
equality and transcendence,—it is necessary to rise above the dualities and to
become impersonal, equal, one self with the Immutable, one self with all
existences. This process of growing into the spirit completes our purification.
But while this is being done, while the soul is enlarging into self-knowledge, it
has also to increase in devotion. For it has not only to act in a large spirit of
equality, but to do also sacrifice to the Lord, to that Godhead in all beings
which it does not yet know perfectly, but which it will be able so to know,
integrally, \s{samagra\.m m\=am},
Page 282

when it has firmly the vision of the one self everywhere and in all existences.
Equality and vision of unity once perfectly gained, \s{te
dvandva-moha-nirmukt\=a\,h}, a supreme bhakti, an all-embracing devotion to
the Divine, becomes the whole and the sole law of the being. All other law of
conduct merges into that surrender, \s{sarva-dharm\=an parityajya}. The soul
then becomes firm in this bhakti and in the vow of self-consecration of all its
being, knowledge, works; for it has now for its sure base, its absolute
foundation of existence and action the perfect, the integral, the unifying
knowledge of the all-originating Godhead, \s{te bhajante m\=a\.m d\,r\,dha-vrat\=a\,h}.
\par From the ordinary point of view any return towards bhakti or
continuation of the heart's activities after knowledge and impersonality have
been gained, might seem to be a relapse. For in bhakti there is always the
element, the foundation even of personality, since its motive-power is the love
and adoration of the individual soul, the Jiva, turned towards the supreme and
universal Being. But from the standpoint of the Gita, where the aim is not
inaction and immergence in the eternal Impersonal, but a union with the
Purushottama through the integrality of our being, this objection cannot at all
intervene. In this Yoga the soul escapes indeed its lower personality by the
sense of its impersonal and immutable self-being; but it still acts and all action
belongs to the multiple soul in the mutability of Nature. If we do not bring in
as a corrective to an excessive quietism the idea of sacrifice to the Highest,
we have to regard this element of action as something not at all ourselves,
some remnant of the play of the gunas without any divine reality behind it, a
last dissolving form of ego, of I-ness, a continued impetus of the lower
Nature for which we are not responsible since our knowledge rejects it and
aims at escape from it into pure inaction. But by combining the tranquil
impersonality of the one self with the stress of the works of Nature done as a
sacrifice to the Lord, we by this double key escape from the lower egoistic
personality and grow into the purity of our true spiritual person. Then are we
no longer the bound and ignorant ego in the lower, but the free Jiva in the
supreme Nature. Then we no longer live in the
Page 283

knowledge of the one immutable and impersonal self and this mutable
multiple Nature as two opposite entities, but rise to the very embrace of the
Purushottama discovered simultaneously through both of these powers of our
being. All three are the spirit, and the two which are apparent opposites
prove to be only confronting faces of the third which is the highest. “There is
the immutable and impersonal spiritual being (Purusha),” says Krishna later
on, “and there is the mutable and personal spiritual being. But there is too
another Highest (\s{uttama puru\,sa}) called the supreme self, Paramatman,
he who has entered into this whole world and upbears it, the Lord, the
imperishable. I am this Purushottama who am beyond the mutable and am
greater and higher even than the immutable. He who has knowledge of me
as the Purushottama, adores me (has bhakti for me, \s{bhajati}), with
all-knowledge and in every way of his natural being.” And it is this bhakti of
an integral knowledge and integral self-giving which the Gita now begins to
develop.
\par For note that it is bhakti with knowledge which the Gita demands from
the disciple and it regards all other forms of devotion as good in themselves
but still inferior; they may do well by the way, but they are not the thing at
which it aims in the soul's culmination. Among those who have put away the
sin of the rajasic egoism and are moving towards the Divine, the Gita
distinguishes between four kinds of \s{bhaktas}. There are those who turn to
him as a refuge from sorrow and suffering in the world, \s{\=arta}. There are
those who seek him as the giver of good in the world, \s{arth\=arth\=i}. There
are those who come to him in the desire for knowledge, \s{jij\~n\=asu}. And
lastly there are those who adore him with knowledge, \s{j\~n\=an\=i}. All are
approved by the Gita, but only on the last does it lay the seal of its complete
sanction. All these movements without exception are high and good,
\s{ud\=ar\=a\,h sarva evaite}, but the bhakti with knowledge excels them all,
\s{vi\'si\,syate}. We may say that these forms are successively the bhakti of the
vital-emotional and affective nature,
\note{The later \s{bhakti} of ecstatic love is at its roots psychic in nature; it is
vital-emotional only in its inferior forms or in some of its more outward
manifestations.} that of the
Page 284

practical and dynamic nature, that of the reasoning intellectual nature, and
that of the highest intuitive being which takes up all the rest of the nature into
unity with the Divine. Practically, however, the others may be regarded as
preparatory movements. For the Gita itself here says that it is only at the end
of many existences that one can, after possession of the integral knowledge
and after working that out in oneself through many lives, attain at the long last
to the Transcendent. For the knowledge of the Divine as all things that are is
difficult to attain and rare on earth is the great soul, \s{mah\=atm\=a}, who is
capable of fully so seeing him and of entering into him with his whole being,
in every way of his nature, by the wide power of this all-embracing
knowledge, \s{sarvavit sarvabh\=avena}.
\par It may be asked how is that devotion high and noble, \s{ud\=ara}, which
seeks God only for the worldly boons he can give or as a refuge in sorrow
and suffering, and not the Divine for its own sake? Do not egoism, weakness,
desire reign in such an adoration and does it not belong to the lower nature?
Moreover, where there is not knowledge, the devotee does not approach the
Divine in his integral all-embracing truth, \s{v\=asudeva\,h sarvam iti}, but
constructs imperfect names and images of the Godhead which are only
reflections of his own need, temperament and nature, and he worships them
to help or appease his natural longings. He constructs for the Godhead the
name and form of Indra or Agni, of Vishnu or Shiva, of a divinised Christ or
Buddha, or else some composite of natural qualities, an indulgent God of love
and mercy, or a severe God of righteousness and justice, or an awe-inspiring
God of wrath and terror and flaming punishments, or some amalgam of any
of these, and to that he raises his altars without and in his heart and mind and
falls down before it to demand from it worldly good and joy or healing of his
wounds or a sectarian sanction for an erring, dogmatic, intellectual, intolerant
knowledge. All this up to a certain point is true enough. Very rare is the great
soul who knows that Vasudeva the omnipresent Being is all that is,
\s{v\=asudeva\,h sarvam iti sa mah\=atm\=a sudurlabha\,h}. Men are led away by
various outer desires which take from them the working
Page 285

of the inner knowledge, \s{k\=amais tais tair h\,rtaj\~n\=an\=a\,h}. Ignorant, they resort
to other godheads, imperfect forms of the deity which correspond to their
desire, \s{prapadyante 'nyadevat\=a\,h}. Limited, they set up this or that rule and
cult, \s{ta\.m ta\.m niyamam \=asth\=aya}, which satisfies the need of their nature.
And in all this it is a compelling personal determination, it is this narrow need
of their own nature that they follow and take for the highest truth,—incapable
yet of the infinite and its largeness. The Godhead in these forms gives them
their desires if their faith is whole; but these fruits and gratifications are
temporary and it is a petty intelligence and unformed reason which makes the
pursuit of them its principle of religion and life. And so far as there is a
spiritual attainment by this way, it is only to the gods; it is only the Divine in
formations of mutable nature and as the giver of her results that they realise.
But those who adore the transcendent and integral Godhead embrace all this
and transform it all, exalt the gods to their highest, Nature to her summits, and
go beyond them to the very Godhead, realise and attain to the Transcendent.
\s{Dev\=an deva-yajo y\=anti mad-bhakt\=a y\=anti m\=am api}.
\par Still the supreme Godhead does not at all reject these devotees because
of their imperfect vision. For the Divine in his supreme transcendent being,
unborn, imminuable and superior to all these partial manifestations, cannot be
easily known to any living creature. He is self-enveloped in this immense
cloak of Maya, that Maya of his Yoga, by which he is one with the world and
yet beyond it, immanent but hidden, seated in all hearts but not revealed to
any and every being. Man in Nature thinks that these manifestations in
Nature are all the Divine, when they are only his works and his powers and
his veils. He knows all past and all present and future existences, but him
none yet knoweth. If then after thus bewildering them with his workings in
Nature, he were not to meet them in these at all, there would be no divine
hope for man or for any soul in Maya. Therefore according to their nature, as
they approach him, he accepts their bhakti and answers to it with the reply of
divine love and compassion. These forms are after all a certain kind of
Page 286

manifestation through which the imperfect human intelligence can touch him,
these desires are first means by which our souls turn towards him: nor is any
devotion worthless or ineffective, whatever its limitations. It has the one
grand necessity, faith. “Whatever form of me any devotee with faith desires
to worship, I make that faith of his firm and undeviating.” By the force of
that faith in his cult and worship he gets his desire and the spiritual realisation
for which he is at the moment fitted. By seeking all his good from the Divine,
he shall come in the end to seek in the Divine all his good. By depending for
his joys on the Divine, he shall learn to fix in the Divine all his joy. By
knowing the Divine in his forms and qualities, he shall come to know him as
the All and the Transcendent who is the source of all things.
\note{There is a place also for the three lesser seekings even after the
highest attainment, but transformed, not narrowly personal,—for there can
still be a passion for the removal of sorrow and evil and ignorance and for the
increasing evolution and integral manifestation of the supreme good, power,
joy and knowledge in this phenomenal Nature.}
\par Thus by spiritual development devotion becomes one with knowledge.
The Jiva comes to delight in the one Godhead,—in the Divine known as all
being and consciousness and delight and as all things and beings and
happenings, known in Nature, known in the self, known for that which
exceeds self and Nature. He is ever in constant union with him,
\s{nityayukta}; his whole life and being are an eternal Yoga with the
Transcendent than whom there is nothing higher, with the Universal besides
whom there is none else and nothing else. On him is concentred all his bhakti,
\s{ekabhakti\,h}, not on any partial godhead, rule or cult. This single devotion is
his whole law of living and he has gone beyond all creeds of religious belief,
rules of conduct, personal aims of life. He has no griefs to be healed, for he is
in possession of the All-blissful. He has no desires to hunger after, for he
possesses the highest and the All and is close to the All-Power that brings all
fulfilment. He has no doubts or baffled seekings left, for all knowledge
streams upon him from the Light in which he lives. He loves perfectly the
Divine and is his beloved; for as he takes joy in the Divine, so too the Divine
takes joy in him. This is
Page 287

the God-lover who has the knowledge, \s{j\~n\=an\=i} \s{bhakta}. And this
knower, says the Godhead in the Gita, is my self; the others seize only
motives and aspects in Nature, but he the very self-being and all-being of the
Purushottama with which he is in union. His is the divine birth in the supreme
Nature, integral in being, completed in will, absolute in love, perfected in
knowledge. In him the Jiva's cosmic existence is justified because it has
exceeded itself and so found its own whole and highest truth of being.
Page 288

\par
\HN III
\par
\ht The Supreme Divine
\note{Gita, VII. 29-30, VIII.}
\par\drop Already what has been said in the seventh chapter provides us with
the starting-point of our new and fuller position and fixes it with sufficient
precision. Substantially it comes to this that we are to move inwardly towards
a greater consciousness and a supreme existence, not by a total exclusion of
our cosmic nature, but by a higher, a spiritual fulfilment of all that we now
essentially are. Only there is to be a change from our mortal imperfection to
a divine perfection of being. The first idea on which this possibility is founded,
is the conception of the individual soul in man as in its eternal essence and its
original power a ray of the supreme Soul and Godhead, here a veiled
manifestation of him, a being of his being, a consciousness of his
consciousness, a nature of his nature, but in the obscurity of this mental and
physical existence self-forgetful of its source, its reality, its true character.
The second idea is that of the double nature of the Soul in
manifestation,—the original nature in which it is one with its own true spiritual
being, and the derived in which it is subject to the confusions of egoism and
ignorance. The latter has to be cast away and the spiritual has to be inwardly
recovered, fulfilled, made dynamic and active. Through an inner
self-fulfilment, the opening of a new status, our birth into a new power, we
return to the nature of the Spirit and re-become a portion of the Godhead
from whom we have descended into this mortal figure of being.
\par There is here at once a departure from the general contemporary mind
of Indian thought, a less negating attitude, a greater affirmation. In place of
its obsessing idea of a self-annulment of Nature we get the glimpse of an
ampler solution, the principle of a self-fulfilment in divine Nature. There is,
even, at least
Page 289

a foreshadowing of the later developments of the religions of Bhakti. Our
first experience of what is beyond our normal status, concealed behind the
egoistic being in which we live, is still for the Gita the calm of a vast
impersonal immutable self in whose equality and oneness we lose our petty
egoistic personality and cast off in its tranquil purity all our narrow motives of
desire and passion. But our second completer vision reveals to us a living
Infinite, a divine immeasurable Being from whom all that we are proceeds
and to which all that we are belongs, self and nature, world and spirit. When
we are one with him in self and spirit, we do not lose ourselves, but rather
recover our true selves in him poised in the supremacy of this Infinite. And
this is done at one and the same time by three simultaneous movements,—an
integral self-finding through works founded in his and our spiritual nature, an
integral self-becoming through knowledge of the Divine Being in whom all
exists and who is all, and—most sovereign and decisive movement of all—an
integral self-giving through love and devotion of our whole being to this All
and this Supreme, attracted to the Master of our works, to the Inhabitant of
our hearts, to the continent of all our conscious existence. To him who is the
source of all that we are, we give all that we are. Our persistent consecration
turns into knowledge of him all our knowing and into light of his power all our
action. The passion of love in our self-giving carries us up to him and opens
the mystery of his deepest heart of being. Love completes the triple cord of
the sacrifice, perfects the triune key of the highest secret, \s{uttama\.m
rahasyam}.
\par An integral knowledge in our self-giving is the first condition of its
effective force. And therefore we have first of all to know this Purusha in all
the powers and principles of his divine existence, \s{tattvata\,h}, in the whole
harmony of it, in its eternal essence and living process. But to the ancient
thought all the value of this knowledge, \s{tattvaj\~n\=ana}, lay in its power for
release out of our mortal birth into the immortality of a supreme existence.
The Gita therefore proceeds next to show how this liberation too in the
highest degree is a final outcome of its own movement of spiritual
self-fulfilment. The knowledge of the Purushottama,
Page 290

it says in effect, is the perfect knowledge of the Brahman. Those who have
resort to Me as their refuge, \s{m\=am \=a\'sritya}, their divine light, their
deliverer, receiver and harbourer of their souls, those who turn to Me in their
spiritual effort towards release from age and death, from the mortal being
and its limitations, says Krishna, come to know that Brahman and all the
integrality of the spiritual nature and the entirety of Karma. And because
they know Me and know at the same time the material and the divine nature
of being and the truth of the Master of sacrifice, they keep knowledge of Me
also in the critical moment of their departure from physical existence and
have at that moment their whole consciousness in union with Me. Therefore
they attain to Me. No longer bound to the mortal existence, they reach the
very highest status of the Divine quite as effectively as those who lose their
separate personality in the impersonal and immutable Brahman. Thus the Gita
closes this important and decisive seventh chapter.
\par Here we have certain expressions which give us in their brief sum the
chief essential truths of the manifestation of the supreme Divine in the
cosmos. All the originative and effective aspects of it are there, all that
concerns the soul in its return to integral self-knowledge. First there is that
Brahman, \s{tad brahma}; \s{adhy\=atma}, second, the principle of the self in
Nature; \s{adhibh\=uta} and \s{adhidaiva} next, the objective phenomenon and
subjective phenomenon of being; \s{adhiyaj\~na} last, the secret of the cosmic
principle of works and sacrifice. I, the Purushottama (\s{m\=a\.m vidu\,h}), says
in effect Krishna, I who am above all these things, must yet be sought and
known through all together and by means of their relations,—that is the only
complete way for the human consciousness which is seeking its path back
towards Me. But these terms in themselves are not at first quite clear or at
least they are open to different interpretations, they have to be made precise
in their connotation, and Arjuna the disciple at once asks for their elucidation.
Krishna answers very briefly,—nowhere does the Gita linger very long upon
any purely metaphysical explanation; it gives only so much and in such a way
as will make their truth just seizable for the soul to proceed on to
Page 291

experience. By that Brahman, a phrase which in the Upanishads is more than
once used for the self-existent as opposed to the phenomenal being, the Gita
intends, it appears, the immutable self-existence which is the highest
self-expression of the Divine and on whose unalterable eternity all the rest, all
that moves and evolves, is founded, \s{ak\,sara\.m paramam}. By \s{adhy\=atma}
it means \s{svabh\=ava}, the spiritual way and law of being of the soul in the
supreme Nature. Karma, it says, is the name given to the creative impulse
and energy, \s{visarga\,h}, which looses out things from this first essential
self-becoming, this Swabhava, and effects, creates, works out under its
influence the cosmic becoming of existences in Prakriti. By \s{adhibh\=uta} is
to be understood all the result of mutable becoming, \s{k\,saro bh\=ava\,h}. By
\s{adhidaiva} is intended the Purusha, the soul in Nature, the subjective being
who observes and enjoys as the object of his consciousness all that is this
mutable becoming of his essential existence worked out here by Karma in
Nature. By \s{adhiyaj\~na}, the Lord of works and sacrifice, I mean, says
Krishna, myself, the Divine, the Godhead, the Purushottama here secret in
the body of all these embodied existences. All that is, therefore, falls within
this formula.
\par The Gita immediately proceeds from this brief statement to work out the
idea of the final release by knowledge which it has suggested in the last verse
of the preceding chapter. It will return indeed upon its thought hereafter to
give such ulterior light as is needed for action and inner realisation, and we
may wait till then for a fuller knowledge of all that these terms indicate. But
before we proceed farther, it is necessary to bring out as much of the
connection between these things as we are justified in understanding from
this passage itself and from what has gone before. For here is indicated the
Gita's idea of the process of the cosmos. First there is the Brahman, the
highest immutable self-existent being which all existences are behind the play
of cosmic Nature in time and space and causality, \s{de\'sa-k\=ala-nimitta}. For
by that self-existence alone time and space and causality are able to exist,
and without that unchanging support omnipresent, yet indivisible they could
not proceed to their divisions and results and measures. But of itself the
immutable
Page 292

Brahman does nothing, causes nothing, determines nothing; it is impartial,
equal, all-supporting, but does not select or originate. What then originates,
what determines, what gives the divine impulsion of the Supreme? what is it
that governs Karma and actively unrolls the cosmic becoming in Time out of
the eternal being? It is Nature as Swabhava. The Supreme, the Godhead, the
Purushottama is there and supports on his eternal immutability the action of
his higher spiritual Shakti. He displays the divine Being, Consciousness, Will
or Power, \s{yayeda\.m dh\=aryate jagat}: that is the Para Prakriti. The
self-awareness of the Spirit in this supreme Nature perceives in the light of
self-knowledge the dynamic idea, the authentic truth of whatever he
separates in his own being and expresses it in the Swabhava, the spiritual
nature of the Jiva. The inherent truth and principle of the self of each Jiva,
that which works itself out in manifestation, the essential divine nature in all
which remains constant behind all conversions, perversions, reversions, that is
the Swabhava. All that is in the Swabhava is loosed out into cosmic Nature
for her to do what she can with it under the inner eye of the Purushottama.
Out of the constant \s{svabh\=ava}, out of the essential nature and
self-principle of being of each becoming, she creates the varied mutations by
which she strives to express it, unrolls all her changes in name and form, in
time and space and those successions of condition developed one out of the
other in time and space which we call causality, \s{nimitta}.
\par All this bringing out and continual change from state to state is Karma, is
action of Nature, is the energy of Prakriti, the worker, the goddess of
processes. It is first a loosing forth of the \s{svabh\=ava} into its creative
action, \s{visarga\,h}. The creation is of existences in the becoming,
\s{bh\=uta-kara\,h}, and of all that they subjectively or otherwise become,
\s{bh\=ava-kara\,h}. All taken together, it is a constant birth of things in Time,
\s{udbhava}, of which the creative energy of Karma is the principle. All this
mutable becoming emerges by a combination of the powers and energies of
Nature, \s{adhibh\=uta}, which constitutes the world and is the object of the
soul's consciousness. In it all the soul is the enjoying and observing Deity in
Nature; the divine powers of
Page 293

mind and will and sense, all the powers of its conscious being by which it
reflects this working of Prakriti are its godheads, \s{adhidaiva}. This soul in
Nature is therefore the \s{k\,sara puru\,sa}, it is the mutable soul, the eternal
activity of the Godhead: the same soul in the Brahman drawn back from her
is the \s{ak\,sara puru\,sa}, the immutable self, the eternal silence of the
Godhead. But in the form and body of the mutable being inhabits the supreme
Godhead. Possessing at once the calm of the immutable existence and the
enjoyment of the mutable action there dwells in man the Purushottama. He is
not only remote from us in some supreme status beyond, but he is here too in
the body of every being, in the heart of man and in Nature. There he receives
the works of Nature as a sacrifice and awaits the conscious self-giving of the
human soul: but always even in the human creature's ignorance and egoism
he is the Lord of his swabhava and the Master of all his works, who presides
over the law of Prakriti and Karma. From him the soul came forth into the
play of Nature's mutations; to him the soul returns through immutable
self-existence to the highest status of the Divine, \s{para\.m dh\=ama}.
\par Man, born into the world, revolves between world and world in the
action of Prakriti and Karma. Purusha in Prakriti is his formula: what the soul
in him thinks, contemplates and acts, that always he becomes. All that he had
been, determined his present birth; and all that he is, thinks, does in this life up
to the moment of his death, determines what he will become in the worlds
beyond and in lives yet to be. If birth is a becoming, death also is a becoming,
not by any means a cessation. The body is abandoned, but the soul goes on
its way, \s{tyaktv\=a kalevaram}. Much then depends on what he is at the
critical moment of his departure. For whatever form of becoming his
consciousness is fixed on at the time of death and has been full of that
always in his mind and thought before death, to that form he must attain,
since the Prakriti by Karma works out the soul's thoughts and energies and
that is in real fact her whole business. Therefore, if the soul in the human
being desires to attain to the status of the Purushottama, there are two
necessities, two conditions which must be satisfied before that can be
possible. He must have
Page 294

moulded towards that ideal his whole inner life in his earthly living; and he
must be faithful to his aspiration and will in his departing. “Whoever leaves
his body and departs” says Krishna “remembering me at his time of end,
comes to my \s{bh\=ava},” that of the Purushottama, my status of being. He is
united with the original being of the Divine and that is the ultimate becoming
of the soul, \s{paro bh\=ava\,h}, the last result of Karma in its return upon itself
and towards its source. The soul which has followed the play of cosmic
evolution that veils here its essential spiritual nature, its original form of
becoming, \s{svabh\=ava}, and has passed through all these other ways of
becoming of its consciousness which are only its phenomena, \s{ta\.m ta\.m
bh\=avam}, returns to that essential nature and, finding through this return its
true self and spirit, comes to the original status of being which is from the
point of view of the return a highest becoming, \s{mad-bh\=avam}. In a certain
sense we may say that it becomes God, since it unites itself with nature of
the Divine in a last transformation of its own phenomenal nature and
existence.
\par The Gita here lays a great stress on the thought and state of mind at the
time of death, a stress which will with difficulty be understood if we do not
recognise what may be called the self-creative power of the consciousness.
What the thought, the inner regard, the faith, \s{\'sraddh\=a}, settles itself upon
with a complete and definite insistence, into that our inner being tends to
change. This tendency becomes a decisive force when we go to those higher
spiritual and self-evolved experiences which are less dependent on external
things than is our ordinary psychology, enslaved as that is to outward Nature.
There we can see ourselves steadily becoming that on which we keep our
minds fixed and to which we constantly aspire. Therefore there any lapse of
the thought, any infidelity of the memory means always a retardation of the
change or some fall in its process and a going back towards what we were
before,—at least so long as we have not substantially and irrevocably fixed
our new becoming. When we have done that, when we have made it normal
to our experience, the memory of it remains self-existently because that now
is the natural form of our consciousness. In the critical moment of passing
Page 295

from the mortal plane of living, the importance of our then state of
consciousness becomes evident. But it is not a death-bed remembrance at
variance with or insufficiently prepared by the whole tenor of our life and our
past subjectivity that can have this saving power. The thought of the Gita
here is not on a par with the indulgences and facilities of popular religion; it
has nothing in common with the crude fancies that make the absolution and
last unction of the priest, an edifying “Christian” death after an unedifying
profane life or the precaution or accident of a death in sacred Benares or
holy Ganges a sufficient machinery of salvation. The divine subjective
becoming on which the mind has to be fixed firmly in the moment of the
physical death, \s{ya\.m smaran bh\=ava\.m tyajati ante kalevaram}, must have
been one into which the soul was at each moment growing inwardly during
the physical life, \s{sad\=a tad-bh\=ava-bh\=avita\,h}. “Therefore,” says the divine
Teacher, “at all times remember me and fight; for if thy mind and thy
understanding are always fixed on and given up to Me, \s{mayi
arpita-mano-buddhi\,h}, to Me thou shalt surely come. For it is by thinking
always of him with a consciousness united with him in an undeviating Yoga
of constant practice that one comes to the divine and supreme Purusha.”
\par We arrive here at the first description of this supreme Purusha,—the
Godhead who is even more and greater than the Immutable and to whom the
Gita gives subsequently the name of Purushottama. He too in his timeless
eternity is immutable and far beyond all this manifestation and here in Time
there dawn on us only faint glimpses of his being conveyed through many
varied symbols and disguises, \s{avyakto ak\,sara\,h}. Still he is not merely a
featureless or indiscernible existence, \s{anirde\'syam}; or he is indiscernible
only because he is subtler than the last subtlety of which the mind is aware
and because the form of the Divine is beyond our thought, \s{a\,nor
a\,n\=iy\=a\.msam acintya-r\=upam}. This supreme Soul and Self is the Seer, the
Ancient of Days and in his eternal self-vision and wisdom the Master and
Ruler of all existence who sets in their place in his being all things that are,
\s{kavi\.m pur\=a\,nam anu\'s\=asit\=ara\.m sarvasya dh\=at\=aram}. This supreme Soul is
the immutable self-existent Brahman of whom the Veda-knowers
Page 296

speak, and this is that into which the doers of askesis enter when they have
passed beyond the affections of the mind of mortality and for the desire of
which they practise the control of the bodily passions.
\note{The language here is taken bodily from the Upanishads.} That eternal
reality is the highest step, place, foothold of being (\s{padam}); therefore is it
the supreme goal of the soul's movement in Time, itself no movement but a
status original, sempiternal and supreme, \s{para\.m} \s{sth\=anam \=adyam}.
\par The Gita describes the last state of the mind of the Yogin in which he
passes from life through death to this supreme divine existence. A motionless
mind, a soul armed with the strength of Yoga, a union with God in
bhakti,—the union by love is not here superseded by the featureless
unification through knowledge, it remains to the end a part of the supreme
force of the Yoga,—and the life-force entirely drawn up and set between the
brows in the seat of mystic vision. All the doors of the sense are closed, the
mind is shut in into the heart, the life-force taken up out of its diffused
movement into the head, the intelligence concentrated in the utterance of the
sacred syllable OM and its conceptive thought in the remembrance of the
supreme Godhead, \s{m\=am anusmaran}. That is the established Yogic way
of going, a last offering up of the whole being to the Eternal, the
Transcendent. But still that is only a process; the essential condition is the
constant undeviating memory of the Divine in life, even in action and
battle—\s{m\=am anusmara yudhya ca}—and the turning of the whole act of
living into an uninterrupted Yoga, \s{nitya-yoga}. Whoever does that, finds
Me easy to attain, says the Godhead; he is the great soul who reaches the
supreme perfection.
\par The condition to which the soul arrives when it thus departs from life is
supracosmic. The highest heavens of the cosmic plan are subject to a return
to rebirth; but there is no rebirth imposed on the soul that departs to the
Purushottama. Therefore whatever fruit can be had from the aspiration of
knowledge to the indefinable Brahman, is acquired also by this other and
comprehensive aspiration through knowledge, works and love to the
Page 297

self-existent Godhead who is the Master of works and the Friend of mankind
and of all beings. To know him so and so to seek him does not bind to rebirth
or to the chain of Karma; the soul can satisfy its desire to escape
permanently from the transient and painful condition of our mortal being. And
the Gita here, in order to make more precise to the mind this circling round of
births and the escape from it, adopts the ancient theory of the cosmic cycles
which became a fixed part of Indian cosmological notions. There is an eternal
cycle of alternating periods of cosmic manifestation and non-manifestation,
each period called respectively a day and a night of the creator Brahma, each
of equal length in Time, the long aeon of his working which endures for a
thousand ages, the long aeon of his sleep of another thousand silent ages. At
the coming of the Day all manifestations are born into being out of the
unmanifest, at the coming of the Night all vanish or are dissolved into it. Thus
all these existences alternate helplessly in the cycle of becoming and
non-becoming; they come into the becoming again and again, \s{bh\=utv\=a
bh\=utv\=a}, and they go back constantly into the unmanifest. But this unmanifest
is not the original divinity of the Being; there is another status of his
existence, \s{bh\=avo 'nyo}, a supracosmic unmanifest beyond this cosmic
non-manifestation, which is eternally self-seated, is not an opposite of this
cosmic status of manifestation but far above and unlike it, changeless, eternal,
not forced to perish with the perishing of all these existences. “He is called
the unmanifest immutable, him they speak of as the supreme soul and status,
and those who attain to him return not; that is my supreme place of being,
\s{parama\.m dh\=ama}.” For the soul attaining to it has escaped out of the
cycle of cosmic manifestation and non-manifestation.
\par Whether we entertain or we dismiss this cosmological notion,—which
depends on the value we are inclined to assign to the knowledge of “the
knowers of day and night,”—the important thing is the turn the Gita gives to
it. One might easily imagine that this eternally unmanifested Being whose
status seems to have nothing to do with the manifestation or the
non-manifestation, must be the ever undefined and indefinable Absolute, and
the proper way to reach him is to get rid of all
Page 298

that we have become in the manifestation, not to carry up to it our whole
inner consciousness in a combined concentration of the mind's knowledge,
the heart's love, the Yogic will, the vital life-force. Especially, bhakti seems
inapplicable to the Absolute who is void of every relation, \s{avyavah\=arya}.
“But” insists the Gita,—although this condition is supracosmic and although it
is eternally unmanifest,—still “that supreme Purusha has to be won by a
bhakti which turns to him alone in whom all beings exist and by whom all this
world has been extended in space.” In other words, the supreme Purusha is
not an entirely relationless Absolute aloof from our illusions, but he is the
Seer, Creator and Ruler of the worlds, \s{kavim anu\'s\=asit\=aram},
\s{dh\=at\=aram}, and it is by knowing and by loving Him as the One and the All,
\s{v\=asudeva\,h} \s{sarvam iti}, that we ought by a union with him of our whole
conscious being in all things, all energies, all actions to seek the supreme
consummation, the perfect perfection, the absolute release.
\par Then there comes a more curious thought which the Gita has adopted
from the mystics of the early Vedanta. It gives the different times at which
the Yogin has to leave his body according as he wills to seek rebirth or to
avoid it. Fire and light and smoke or mist, the day and the night, the bright
fortnight of the lunar month and the dark, the northern solstice and the
southern, these are the opposites. By the first in each pair the knowers of the
Brahman go to the Brahman; but by the second the Yogin reaches the “lunar
light” and returns subsequently to human birth. These are the bright and the
dark paths, called the path of the gods and the path of the fathers in the
Upanishads, and the Yogin who knows them is not misled into any error.
Whatever psycho-physical fact or else symbolism there may be behind this
notion,
\note{Yogic experience shows in fact that there is a real psycho-physical
truth, not indeed absolute in its application, behind this idea, viz., that in the
inner struggle between the powers of the Light and the powers of the
Darkness, the former tend to have a natural prevalence in the bright periods
of the day or the year, the latter in the dark periods, and this balance may last
until the fundamental victory is won.}—it comes down from the age of the
mystics who saw in every physical thing an effective symbol of the
psychological
Page 299

and who traced everywhere an interaction and a sort of identity of the
outward with the inward, light and knowledge, the fiery principle and the
spiritual energy,—we need observe only the turn by which the Gita closes the
passage: “Therefore at all times be in Yoga.”
\par For that is after all the essential, to make the whole being one with the
Divine, so entirely and in all ways one as to be naturally and constantly fixed
in union, and thus to make all living, not only thought and meditation, but
action, labour, battle, a remembering of God. “Remember me and fight,”
means not to lose the ever-present thought of the Eternal for one single
moment in the clash of the temporal which normally absorbs our minds, and
that seems sufficiently difficult, almost impossible. It is entirely possible
indeed only if the other conditions are satisfied. If we have become in our
consciousness one self with all, one self which is always to our thought the
Divine, and even our eyes and our other senses see and sense the Divine
Being everywhere so that it is impossible for us at any time at all to feel or
think of anything as that merely which the unenlightened sense perceives, but
only as the Godhead at once concealed and manifested in that form, and if
our will is one in consciousness with a supreme will and every act of will, of
mind, of body is felt to come from it, to be its movement, instinct with it or
identical, then what the Gita demands can be integrally done. The
remembrance of the Divine Being becomes no longer an intermittent act of
the mind, but the natural condition of our activities and in a way the very
substance of the consciousness. The Jiva has become possessed of its right
and natural, its spiritual relation to the Purushottama and all our life is a Yoga,
an accomplished and yet an eternally self-accomplishing oneness.
Page 300

\par
\HN IV
\par
\ht The Secret of Secrets
\par\drop All the truth that has developed itself at this length step by step,
each bringing forward a fresh aspect of the integral knowledge and founding
on it some result of spiritual state and action, has now to take a turn of
immense importance. The Teacher therefore takes care first to draw
attention to the decisive character of what he is about to say, so that the mind
of Arjuna may be awakened and attentive. For he is going to open his mind to
the knowledge and sight of the integral Divinity and lead up to the vision of
the eleventh book, by which the warrior of Kurukshetra becomes conscious
of the author and upholder of his being and action and mission, the Godhead
in man and the world, whom nothing in man and the world limits or binds,
because all proceeds from him, is a movement in his infinite being, continues
and is supported by his will, is justified in his divine self-knowledge, has him
always for its origin, substance and end. Arjuna is to become aware of
himself as existing only in God and as acting only by the power within him, his
workings only an instrumentality of the divine action, his egoistic
consciousness only a veil and to his ignorance a misrepresentation of the real
being within him which is an immortal spark and portion of the supreme
Godhead.
\par This vision is to remove whatever doubt may still remain within his mind;
it is to make him strong for the action from which he has shrunk, but to which
he is irrevocably commanded and can no more recoil from it,—for to recoil
would be the negation and denial of the divine will and sanction within him
already expressed in his individual consciousness but soon to assume the
appearance of the greater cosmic sanction. For now the world Being appears
to him as the body of God ensouled by the eternal Time-spirit and with its
majestic and dreadful voice missions him to the crash of the battle. He is
called by it to
Page 301

the liberation of his spirit, to the fulfilment of his action in the cosmic mystery,
and the two—liberation and action—are to be one movement. His intellectual
doubts are clearing away as a greater light of self-knowledge and the
knowledge of God and Nature is being unfolded before him. But intellectual
clarity is not enough; he must see with the inner sight illumining his blind
outward human vision, so that he may act with the consent of his whole
being, with a perfect faith in all his members, \s{\'sraddh\=a}, with a perfect
devotion to the Self of his self and the Master of his being and to the same
Self of the world and Master of all being in the universe.
\par All that has gone before laid the foundations of the knowledge or
prepared its first necessary materials or scaffolding, but now the full frame of
the structure is to be placed before his unsealed vision. All that is to come
after will have its great importance because it will analyse parts of this frame,
show in what this or that in it consists; but in substance the integral
knowledge of the Being who is speaking to him is to be now unveiled to his
eyes so that he cannot choose but see. What has gone before showed him
that he is not bound fatally to the knot of the ignorance and egoistic action in
which he had hitherto remained contented till its partial solutions sufficed no
longer to satisfy his mind bewildered by the conflict of opposite appearances
that make up the action of the world and his heart troubled by the
entanglement of his works from which he feels himself unable to escape
except by renunciation of life and works. He has been shown that there are
two opposed ways of working and living, one in the ignorance of the ego, one
in the clear self-knowledge of a divine being. He may act with desire, with
passion, an ego driven by the qualities of the lower Nature, subject to the
balance of virtue and sin, joy and sorrow, preoccupied with the fruits and
consequences of his works, success and defeat, good result and evil result,
bound on the world machine, caught up in a great tangle of action and
inaction and perverse action which perplex the heart and mind and soul of
man with their changing and contrary masks and appearances. But he is not
utterly tied down to the works of the ignorance; he may do if he will the
Page 302

works of knowledge. He may act here as the higher thinker, the knower, the
Yogin, the seeker of freedom first and afterwards the liberated spirit. To
perceive that great possibility and to keep his will and intelligence fixed on the
knowledge and self-vision which will realise and make it effectual, is the path
of escape from his sorrow and bewilderment, the way out of the human
riddle.
\par There is a spirit within us calm, superior to works, equal, not bound in
this external tangle, surveying it as its supporter, source, immanent witness,
but not involved in it. Infinite, containing all, one self in all, it surveys
impartially the whole action of nature and it sees that it is only the action of
Nature, not its own action. It sees that the ego and its will and its intelligence
are all a machinery of Nature and that all their activities are determined by
the complexity of her triple modes and qualities. The eternal spirit itself is
free from these things. It is free from them because it knows; it knows that
Nature and ego and the personal being of all these creatures do not make up
the whole of existence. For existence is not merely a glorious or a vain, a
wonderful or a dismal panorama of a constant mutation of becoming. There
is something eternal, immutable, imperishable, a timeless self-existence; that
is not affected by the mutations of Nature. It is their impartial witness, neither
affecting nor affected, neither acting nor acted upon, neither virtuous nor
sinful, but always pure, complete, great and unwounded. Neither grieving nor
rejoicing at all that afflicts and attracts the egoistic being, it is the friend of
none, the enemy of none, but one equal self of all. Man is not now conscious
of this self, because he is wrapped up in his outward-going mind, because he
will not learn or has not learned to live within; he does not detach himself,
draw back from his action and observe it as the work of Nature. Ego is the
obstacle, the linch-pin of the wheel of delusion, the loss of the ego in the
soul's self the first condition of freedom. To become spirit, no longer merely a
mind and ego, is the opening word of this message of liberation.
\par Arjuna has been therefore called upon first to give up all desire of the
fruits of his works and become simply the desireless
Page 303

impartial doer of whatever has to be done,—leaving the fruit to whatever
power may be the master of the cosmic workings. For he very evidently is
not the master; it is not for the satisfaction of his personal ego that Nature
was set upon her ways, not for the fulfilment of his desires and preferences
that the universal Life is living, not for the justification of his intellectual
opinions, judgments and standards that the universal Mind is working, nor is it
to that petty tribunal that it has to refer its cosmic aims or its terrestrial
method and purposes. These claims can only be made by the ignorant souls
who live in their personality and see everything from that poor and narrow
standpoint. He must stand back first from his egoistic demand on the world
and work only as one among the millions who contributes his share of effort
and labour to a result determined not by himself, but by the universal action
and purpose. But he has to do yet more, he has to give up the idea of being
the doer and to see, freed from all personality, that it is the universal
intelligence, will, mind, life that is at work in him and in all others. Nature is
the universal worker; his works are hers, even as the fruits of her works in
him are part of the grand sum of result guided by a greater Power than his
own. If he can do these two things spiritually, then the tangle and bondage of
his works will fall far away from him; for the whole knot of that bondage lay
in his egoistic demand and participation. Passion and sin and personal joy and
grief will fade away from his soul, which will now live within, pure, large,
calm, equal to all persons and all things. Action will produce no subjective
reaction and will leave no stain nor any mark on his spirit's purity and peace.
He will have the inner joy, rest, ease and inalienable bliss of a free unaffected
being. Neither within nor without will he have any more the old little
personality, for he will feel consciously one self and spirit with all, even as his
outer nature will have become to his consciousness an inseparable part of the
universal mind, life and will. His separative egoistic personality will have been
taken up and extinguished in the impersonality of spiritual being; his
separative egoistic nature will be unified with the action of cosmic Nature.
\par But this liberation is dependent on two simultaneous, but
Page 304

not yet reconciled perceptions, the clear vision of spirit and the clear vision of
Nature. This is not the scientific and intelligent detachment which is quite
possible even to the materialistic philosopher who has some clear vision of
Nature alone, but not the perception of his own soul and self-being. Nor is it
the intellectual detachment of the idealistic sage who escapes from the more
limiting and disturbing forms of his ego by a luminous use of the reason. This
is a larger, more living, more perfect spiritual detachment which comes by a
vision of the Supreme who is more than Nature and greater than mind and
reason. But even this detachment is only the initial secret of freedom and of
the clear vision of knowledge, it is not the whole clue to the divine
mystery,—for by itself it would leave Nature unexplained and the natural
active part of being isolated from the spiritual and quietistic self-existence.
The divine detachment must be the foundation for a divine participation in
Nature which will replace the old egoistic participation, the divine quietism
must support a divine activism and kinetism. This truth which the Teacher
has had in view all along and therefore insisted on the sacrifice of works, the
recognition of the Supreme as the master of our works and the doctrine of
the Avatar and the divine birth, has yet been at first kept subordinate to the
primary necessity of a quietistic liberation. Only the truths which lead to
spiritual calm, detachment, equality and oneness, in a word, to the perception
and becoming of the immutable self, have been fully developed and given
their largest amplitude of power and significance. The other great and
necessary truth, its complement, has been left in a certain obscurity of a
lesser or relative light; it has been hinted at constantly, but not as yet
developed. Now in these successive chapters it is being rapidly released into
expression.
\par Throughout Krishna, the Avatar, the Teacher, the charioteer of the
human soul in the world-action, has been preparing the revelation of the
secret of himself, Nature's deepest secret. He has kept one note always
sounding across his preparatory strain and insistently coming in as a warning
and prelude of the larger ultimate harmony of his integral Truth. That note
was the idea of a supreme Godhead which dwells within man and Nature,
Page 305

but is greater than man and Nature, is found by impersonality of the self, but
of which impersonal self is not the whole significance. We now see the
meaning of that strong recurring insistence. It was this one Godhead, the
same in universal self and man and Nature who through the voice of the
Teacher in the chariot was preparing for his absolute claim to the whole
being of the awakened seer of things and doer of works. “I who am within
thee,” he was saying, “I who am here in this human body, I for whom all
exists, acts, strives, am at once the secret of the self-existent spirit and of the
cosmic action. This `I' is the greater I of whom the largest human personality
is only a partial and fragmentary manifestation, Nature itself only an inferior
working. Master of the soul, master of all the works of the cosmos, I am the
one Light, the sole Power, the only Being. This Godhead within thee is the
Teacher, the Sun, the lifter of the clear blaze of knowledge in which thou
becomest aware of the difference between thy immutable self and thy
mutable nature. But look beyond the light itself to its source; then shalt thou
know the supreme Soul in which is recovered the spiritual truth of personality
and Nature. See then the one self in all beings that thou mayst see me in all
beings; see all beings in one spiritual self and reality, because that is the way
to see all beings in me; know one Brahman in all that thou mayst see God
who is the supreme Brahman. Know thyself, be thyself that thou mayst be
united with me of whom this timeless self is the clear light or the transparent
curtain. I the Godhead am the highest truth of self and spirit.”
\par Arjuna has to see that the same Godhead is the higher truth too not only
of self and spirit but of Nature and his own personality, the secret at once of
the individual and the universe. That was the Will universal in Nature, greater
than the acts of Nature which proceed from him, to whom belong her actions
and man's and the fruits of them. Therefore has he to do works as a
sacrifice, because that is the truth of his works and of all works. Nature is
the worker and not ego, but Nature is only a power of the Being who is the
sole master of all her works and energisms and of all the aeons of the cosmic
sacrifice. Therefore
Page 306

since his works are that Being's, he has to give up all his actions to the
Godhead in him and the world by whom they are done in the divine mystery
of Nature. This is the double condition of the divine birth of the soul, of its
release from the mortality of the ego and the body into the spiritual and
eternal,—knowledge first of one's timeless immutable self and union through
it with the timeless Godhead, but knowledge too of that which lives behind the
riddle of cosmos, the Godhead in all existences and their workings. Thus only
can we aspire through the offering of all our nature and being to a living union
with the One who has become in Time and Space all that is. Here is the
place of bhakti in the scheme of the Yoga of an integral self-liberation. It is
an adoration and aspiration towards that which is greater than imperishable
self or changing Nature. All knowledge then becomes an adoration and
aspiration, but all works too become an adoration and aspiration. Works of
nature and freedom of soul are unified in this adoration and become one
self-uplifting to the one Godhead. The final release, a passing away from the
lower nature to the source of the higher spiritual becoming, is not an
extinction of the soul,—only its form of ego becomes extinct,—but a
departure of our whole self of knowledge, will and love to dwell no longer in
his universal, but in his supracosmic reality, a fulfilment, not an annullation.
\par Necessarily, to make this knowledge clear to the mind of Arjuna, the
divine Teacher sets out by removing the source of two remaining difficulties,
the antinomy between the impersonal self and the human personality and the
antinomy between the self and Nature. While these two antinomies last, the
Godhead in Nature and man remains obscure, irrational and unbelievable.
Nature has been represented as the mechanical bondage of the gunas, the
soul as the egoistic being subject to that bondage. But if that be all their truth,
they are not and cannot be divine. Nature, ignorant and mechanical, cannot
be a power of God; for divine Power must be free in its workings, spiritual in
its origin, spiritual in its greatness. The soul bound and egoistic in Nature,
mental, vital, physical only, cannot be a portion of the Divine and itself a
divine being; for such a divine being must be itself of
Page 307

the very nature of the Divine, free, spiritual, self-developing, self-existent,
superior to mind, life and body. Both these difficulties and the obscurities they
bring in are removed by one illumining ray of truth. Mechanical Nature is only
a lower truth; it is the formula of an inferior phenomenal action. There is a
higher which is the spiritual and that is the nature of our spiritual personality,
our true person. God is at once impersonal and personal. His impersonality is
to our psychological realisation an infinite of timeless being, consciousness,
bliss of existence; his personality represents itself here as a conscious power
of being, a conscious centre of knowledge and will and the joy of multiple
self-manifestation. We are that one impersonality in the static essence of our
being; we are each of us the multitude of that essential power in our spiritual
person. But the distinction is only for the purposes of self-manifestation; the
divine impersonality is, when one goes behind it, at the same time infinite He,
a supreme soul and spirit. It is the great “I”—\s{so aham}, I am He, from
which all personality and nature proceed and disport themselves here
diversely in the appearance of an impersonal world. Brahman is all this that
is, says the Upanishad, for Brahman is one self which sees itself in four
successive positions of consciousness. Vasudeva, the eternal Being, is all,
says the Gita. He is the Brahman, consciously supports and originates all
from his higher spiritual nature, consciously here becomes all things in a
nature of intelligence, mind, life and sense and objective phenomenon of
material existence. The Jiva is he in that spiritual nature of the Eternal, his
eternal multiplicity, his self-vision from many centres of conscious
self-power. God, Nature and Jiva are the three terms of existence, and these
three are one being.
\par How does this Being manifest himself in cosmos? First as the immutable
timeless self omnipresent and all-supporting which is in its eternity being and
not becoming. Then, held in that being there is an essential power or spiritual
principle of self-becoming, \s{svabh\=ava}, through which by spiritual
self-vision it determines and expresses, creates by liberation all that is latent
or contained in its own existence. The power or the energy of that
self-becoming looses forth into universal action, Karma, all
Page 308

that is thus determined in the spirit. All creation is this action, is this working
of the essential nature, is Karma. But it is developed here in a mutable
Nature of intelligence, mind, life, sense and form-objectivity of material
phenomenon actually cut off from the absolute light and limited by the
Ignorance. All its workings become there a sacrifice of the soul in Nature to
the supreme Soul secret within her, and the supreme Godhead dwells
therefore in all as the Master of their sacrifice, whose presence and power
govern it and whose self-knowledge and delight of being receive it. To know
this is to have the right knowledge of the universe and the vision of God in the
cosmos and to find out the door of escape from the Ignorance. For this
knowledge, made effective for man by the offering up of his works and all his
consciousness to the Godhead in all, enables him to return to his spiritual
existence and through it to the supracosmic Reality eternal and luminous
above this mutable Nature.
\par This truth is the secret of being which the Gita is now going to apply in
its amplitude of result for our inner life and our outer works. What it is going
to say is the most secret thing of all.
\note{Gita, IX. 1-3.} It is the knowledge of the whole Godhead, \s{samagra\.m
m\=am}, which the Master of his being has promised to Arjuna, that essential
knowledge attended with the complete knowledge of it in all its principles
which will leave nothing yet to be known. The whole knot of the ignorance
which has bewildered his human mind and has made his will recoil from his
divinely appointed work, will have been cut entirely asunder. This is the
wisdom of all wisdoms, the secret of all secrets, the king-knowledge, the
king-secret. It is a pure and supreme light which one can verify by direct
spiritual experience and see in oneself as the truth: it is the right and just
knowledge, the very law of being. It is easy to practise when one gets hold of
it, sees it, tries faithfully to live in it.
\par But faith is necessary; if faith is absent, if one trusts to the critical
intelligence which goes by outward facts and jealously questions the
revelatory knowledge because that does not square
Page 309

with the divisions and imperfections of the apparent nature and seems to
exceed it and state something which carries us beyond the first practical
facts of our present existence, its grief, its pain, evil, defect, undivine error
and stumbling, \s{a\'subham}, then there is no possibility of living out that
greater knowledge. The soul that fails to get faith in the higher truth and law,
must return into the path of ordinary mortal living subject to death and error
and evil: it cannot grow into the Godhead which it denies. For this is a truth
which has to be lived,—and lived in the soul's growing light, not argued out in
the mind's darkness. One has to grow into it, one has to become it,—that is
the only way to verify it. It is only by an exceeding of the lower self that one
can become the real divine self and live the truth of our spiritual existence.
All the apparent truths one can oppose to it are appearances of the lower
Nature. The release from the evil and the defect of the lower Nature,
\s{a\'subham}, can only come by accepting a higher knowledge in which all
this apparent evil becomes convinced of ultimate unreality, is shown to be a
creation of our darkness. But to grow thus into the freedom of the divine
Nature one must accept and believe in the Godhead secret within our present
limited nature. For the reason why the practice of this Yoga becomes
possible and easy is that in doing it we give up the whole working of all that
we naturally are into the hands of that inner divine Purusha. The Godhead
works out the divine birth in us progressively, simply, infallibly, by taking up
our being into his and by filling it with his own knowledge and power,
\s{j\~n\=anad\=ipena bh\=asvat\=a}; he lays hands on our obscure ignorant nature and
transforms it into his own light and wideness. What with entire faith and
without egoism we believe in and impelled by him will to be, the God within
will surely accomplish. But the egoistic mind and life we now and apparently
are, must first surrender itself for transmutation into the hands of that inmost
secret Divinity within us.
Page 310

\par
\HN V
\par
\ht The Divine Truth and Way
\par\drop The Gita then proceeds to unveil the supreme and integral secret,
the one thought and truth in which the seeker of perfection and liberation
must learn to live and the one law of perfection of his spiritual members and
of all their movements. This supreme secret is the mystery of the
transcendent Godhead who is all and everywhere, yet so much greater and
other than the universe and all its forms that nothing here contains him,
nothing expresses him really, and no language which is borrowed from the
appearances of things in space and time and their relations can suggest the
truth of his unimaginable being. The consequent law of our perfection is an
adoration by our whole nature and its self-surrender to its divine source and
possessor. Our one ultimate way is the turning of our entire existence in the
world, and not merely of this or that in it, into a single movement towards the
Eternal. By the power and mystery of a divine Yoga we have come out of
his inexpressible secrecies into this bounded nature of phenomenal things. By
a reverse movement of the same Yoga we must transcend the limits of
phenomenal nature and recover the greater consciousness by which we can
live in the Divine and the Eternal.
\par The supreme being of the Divine is beyond manifestation: the true
sempiternal image of him is not revealed in matter, nor is it seized by life, nor
is it cognisable by mind, \s{acintyar\=upa}, \s{avyaktam\=urti}. What we see is
only a self-created form, \s{r\=upa}, not the eternal form of the Divinity,
\s{svar\=upa}. There is someone or there is something that is other than the
universe, inexpressible, unimaginable, an ineffably infinite Godhead beyond
anything that our largest or subtlest conceptions of infinity can shadow. All
this weft of things to which we give the
Page 311

name of universe, all this immense sum of motion to which we can fix no
limits and vainly seek in its forms and movements for any stable reality, any
status, level and point of cosmic leverage, has been spun out, shaped,
extended by this highest Infinite, founded upon this ineffable supracosmic
Mystery. It is founded upon a self-formulation which is itself unmanifest and
unthinkable. All this mass of becomings always changing and in motion, all
these creatures, existences, things, breathing and living forms cannot contain
him either in their sum or in their separate existence. He is not in them; it is
not in them or by them that he lives, moves or has his being,—God is not the
Becoming. It is they that are in him, it is they that live and move in him and
draw their truth from him; they are his becomings, he is their
being.
\note{\s{matsth\=ani sarvabh\=ut\=ani na c\=aha\.m te\,svavasthita\,h.}} In the
unthinkable timeless and spaceless infinity of his existence he has extended
this minor phenomenon of a boundless universe in an endless space and time.
\par And even to say of him that all exists in him is not the whole truth of the
matter, not the entirely real relation: for it is to speak of him with the idea of
space, and the Divine is spaceless and timeless. Space and time, immanence
and pervasion and exceeding are all of them terms and images of his
consciousness. There is a Yoga of divine Power, \s{me yoga ai\'svara\,h}, by
which the Supreme creates phenomena of himself in a spiritual, not a
material, self-formulation of his own extended infinity, an extension of which
the material is only an image. He sees himself as one with that, is identified
with that and all it harbours. In that infinite self-seeing, which is not his whole
seeing,—the pantheist's identity of God and universe is a still more limited
view,—he is at once one with all that is and yet exceeds it; but he is other
also than this self or extended infinity of spiritual being which contains and
exceeds the universe. All exists here in his world-conscious infinite, but that
again is upheld as a self-conception by the supracosmic reality of the
Godhead which exceeds all our terms of world and being and consciousness.
Page 312

This is the mystery of his being that he is supracosmic, yet not in any
exclusive sense extracosmic. For he pervades it all as its self; there is a
luminous uninvolved presence of the self-being of God, \s{mama \=atm\=a},
which is in constant relation with the becoming and brings all its existences
into manifestation by his simple presence.
\note{\s{bh\=utabh\,rn na ca bh\=utastho mam\=atm\=a bh\=utabh\=avana\,h.}} Therefore it
is that we have these terms of Being and becoming, existence in itself,
\s{\=atman}, and existences dependent upon it, \s{bh\=ut\=ani}, mutable beings and
immutable being. But the highest truth of these two relations and the
resolution of their antinomy must be found in that which exceeds it; it is the
supreme Godhead who manifests both containing self and its contained
phenomena by the power of his spiritual consciousness, \s{yogam\=ay\=a}. And
it is only through union with him in our spiritual consciousness that we can
arrive at our real relations with his being.
\par Metaphysically stated, this is the intention of these verses of the Gita: but
they rest founded not upon any intellectual speculation, but on spiritual
experience; they synthetise because they arise globally from certain truths of
spiritual consciousness. When we attempt to put ourselves into conscious
relations with whatever supreme or universal Being there exists concealed or
manifest in the world, we arrive at a very various experience and one or
other variant term of this experience is turned by different intellectual
conceptions into their fundamental idea of existence. We have, to start with,
the crude experience first of a Divine who is something quite different from
and greater than ourselves, quite different from and greater than the universe
in which we live; and so it is and no more so long as we live only in our
phenomenal selves and see around us only the phenomenal face of the world.
For the highest truth of the Supreme is supracosmic and all that is
phenomenal seems a thing other than the infinity of the self-conscious spirit,
seems an image of a lesser truth if not an illusion. When we dwell in this
difference only, we regard the Divine as if extracosmic. That he is only in
this sense that he is not, being supracosmic,
Page 313

contained in the cosmos and its creations, but not in the sense that they are
outside his being: for there is nothing outside the one Eternal and Real. We
realise this first truth of the Godhead spiritually when we get the experience
that we live and move and have our being in him alone, that however
different from him we may be, we depend on him for our existence and the
universe itself is only a phenomenon and movement in the Spirit.
\par But again we have the farther and more transcendent experience that
our self-existence is one with his self-existence. We perceive a one self of all
and of that we have the consciousness and the vision: we can no longer say
or think that we are entirely different from him, but that there is self and
there is phenomenon of the self-existent; all is one in self, but all is variation
in the phenomenon. By an exclusive intensity of union with the self we may
even come to experience the phenomenon as a thing dreamlike and unreal.
But again by a double intensity we may have too the double experience of a
supreme self-existent oneness with him and yet of ourselves as living with
him and in many relations to him in a persistent form, an actual derivation of
his being. The universe, and our existence in the universe, becomes to us a
constant and real form of the self-aware existence of the Divine. In that
lesser truth we have our relations of difference between us and him and all
these other living or inanimate powers of the Eternal and our dealings with his
cosmic self in the nature of the universe. These relations are other than the
supracosmic truth, they are derivative creations of a certain power of
consciousness of the spirit, and because they are other and because they are
creations the exclusive seekers of the supracosmic Absolute tax them with
an unreality relative or complete. Yet are they from him, they are existent
forms derived from his being, not figments created out of nothing. For it is
ever itself and figures of itself and not things quite other than itself that the
Spirit sees everywhere. Nor can we say that there is nothing at all in the
supracosmic that corresponds to these relations. We cannot say that they are
derivations of consciousness sprung from that source but
Page 314

yet with nothing in the source which at all supports or justifies them, nothing
that is the eternal reality and supernal principle of these forms of his being.
\par Again if we press in yet another way the difference between the self
and the forms of self, we may come to regard the Self as containing and
immanent, we may admit the truth of omnipresent spirit, and yet the forms of
spirit, the moulds of its presence may affect us not only as something other
than it, not only as transient, but as unreal images. We have the experience of
the Spirit, the Divine Being immutable and ever containing in his vision the
mutabilities of the universe; we have too the separate, the simultaneous or the
coincident experience of the Divine immanent in ourselves and in all
creatures. And yet the universe may be to us only an empirical form of his
and our consciousness, or only an image or a symbol of existence by which
we have to construct our significant relations with him and to grow gradually
aware of him. But on the other hand, we get another revealing spiritual
experience in which we are forced to see as the very Divine all things, not
only that Spirit which dwells immutable in the universe and in its countless
creatures, but all this inward and outward becoming. All is then to us a divine
Reality manifesting himself in us and in the cosmos. If this experience is
exclusive, we get the pantheistic identity, the One that is all: but the
pantheistic vision is only a partial seeing. This extended universe is not all that
the Spirit is, there is an Eternal greater than it by which alone its existence is
possible. Cosmos is not the Divine in all his utter reality, but a single
self-expression, a true but minor motion of his being. All these spiritual
experiences, however different or opposed at first sight, are yet reconcilable
if we cease to press on one or other exclusively and if we see this simple
truth that the divine Reality is something greater than the universal existence,
but yet that all universal and particular things are that Divine and nothing
else,—significative of him, we might say, and not entirely That in any part or
sum of their appearance, but still they could not be significative of him if they
were something else and not term and stuff of the
Page 315

divine existence. That is the Real; but they are its expressive
realities.
\note{Even if in the mind we feel them to be comparatively unreal in face of
the absolutely Real. Shankara's Mayavada apart from its logical scaffolding
comes when reduced to terms of spiritual experience to no more than an
exaggerated expression of this relative unreality. Beyond mind the difficulty
disappears, for there it never existed. The separate experiences that lie
behind the differences of religious sects and schools of philosophy or Yoga,
transmuted, shed their divergent mental sequences, are harmonised and,
when exalted to their highest common intensity, unified in the supramental
infinite.}
\par This is what is intended by the phrase, \s{v\=asudeva\,h} \s{sarvam iti}; the
Godhead is all that is universe and all that is in the universe and all that is
more than the universe. The Gita lays stress first on his supracosmic
existence. For otherwise the mind would miss its highest goal and remain
turned towards the cosmic only or else attached to some partial experience of
the Divine in the cosmos. It lays stress next on his universal existence in
which all moves and acts. For that is the justification of the cosmic effort and
that is the vast spiritual self-awareness in which the Godhead self-seen as the
Time-Spirit does his universal works. Next it insists with a certain austere
emphasis on the acceptance of the Godhead as the divine inhabitant in the
human body. For he is the Immanent in all existences, and if the indwelling
divinity is not recognised, not only will the divine meaning of individual
existence be missed, the urge to our supreme spiritual possibilities deprived of
its greatest force, but the relations of soul with soul in humanity will be left
petty, limited and egoistic. Finally, it insists at great length on the divine
manifestation in all things in the universe and affirms the derivation of all that
is from the nature, power and light of the one Godhead. For that seeing too is
essential to the God-knowledge; on it is founded the integral turn of the whole
being and the whole nature Godwards, the acceptance by man of the works
of the divine Power in the world and the possibility of remoulding his
mentality and will into the type of the God-action, transcendent in initiation,
cosmic in motive, transmitted through the individual, the Jiva.
\par The supreme Godhead, the Self immutable behind the cosmic
consciousness, the individual Divinity in the human being
Page 316

and the Divine secretly conscious or partially manifested in cosmic Nature
and all her works and creatures, are then one reality, one Godhead. But the
truths that we can put forward the most confidently of one, are reversed or
they alter their sense when we try to apply them to the other poises of the
one Being. Thus the Divine is always the Lord, Ishwara; but we cannot
therefore crudely apply the idea of his essential lordship and mastery in
exactly the same way without change in all four fields. As the Divine
manifest in cosmic Nature he acts in close identity with Nature. He is himself
then Nature, so to speak, but with a spirit within her workings which foresees
and forewills, understands and enforces, compels the action, overrules in the
result. As the one silent self of all he is the non-doer, and Nature alone is the
doer. He leaves all these works to be done by her according to the law of our
being, \s{svabh\=avas tu pravartate}, and yet he is still the lord, \s{prabhu
vibhu}, because he views and upholds our action and enables Nature to work
by his silent sanction. He by his immobility transmits the power of the
supreme Godhead through the compulsion of his pervading motionless
Presence and supports its workings by the equal regard of his witness Self in
all things. As the supreme supracosmic Godhead he originates all, but is
above all; he compels all to manifest, but does not lose himself in what he
creates or attach himself to the works of his Nature. His is the free presiding
Will of being that is antecedent to all the necessities of the natural action. In
the individual he is during the ignorance the secret Godhead in us who
compels all to revolve on the machine of Nature on which the ego is carried
round as part of the machinery, at once a clog and a convenience. But since
all the Divine is within each being, we can rise above this relation by
transcending the ignorance. For we can identify ourselves with the one Self
supporter of all things and become the witness and non-doer. Or else we can
put our individual being into the human soul's right relation with the supreme
Godhead within us and make it in its parts of nature the immediate cause and
instrument, \s{nimitta}, and in its spiritual self and person a high participant in
the supreme, free and unattached mastery of that inner Numen. This is a
thing we have to see clearly in
Page 317

the Gita; we have to allow for this variation of the sense of the same truth
according to the nodus of relation from which its application comes into
force. Otherwise we shall see mere contradiction and inconsistency where
none exists or be baffled like Arjuna by what seems to us a riddling
utterance.
\par Thus the Gita begins by affirming that the Supreme contains all things in
himself, but is not in any, \s{matsth\=ani sarva-bh\=ut\=ani}, “all are situated in Me,
not I in them,” and yet it proceeds immediately to say, “and yet all existences
are not situated in Me, my self is the bearer of all existences and it is not
situated in existences.” And yet again it insists with an apparent
self-contradiction that the Divine has lodged himself, has taken up his abode
in the human body, \s{m\=anu\,s\=i\.m tanum \=a\'sritam}, and that the recognition of
this truth is necessary for the soul's release by the integral way of works and
love and knowledge. These statements are only in appearance inconsistent
with each other. It is as the supracosmic Godhead that he is not in existences,
nor even they in him; for the distinction we make between Being and
becoming applies only to the manifestation in the phenomenal universe. In the
supracosmic existence all is eternal Being and all, if there too there is any
multiplicity, are eternal beings; nor can the spatial idea of indwelling come in,
since a supracosmic absolute being is not affected by the concepts of time
and space which are created here by the Lord's Yogamaya. There a spiritual,
not a spatial or temporal coexistence, a spiritual identity and coincidence must
be the foundation. But on the other hand in the cosmic manifestation there is
an extension of universe in space and time by the supreme unmanifest
supracosmic Being, and in that extension he appears first as a self who
supports all these existences; \s{bh\=uta-bh\,rt}, he bears them in his
all-pervading self-existence. And, even, through this omnipresent self the
supreme Self too, the Paramatman, can be said to bear the universe; he is its
invisible spiritual foundation and the hidden spiritual cause of the becoming of
all existences. He bears the universe as the secret spirit in us bears our
thoughts, works, movements. He seems to pervade and to contain mind, life
and body, to support them by his presence: but this pervasion is itself an act
Page 318

of consciousness, not material; the body itself is only a constant act of
consciousness of the spirit.
\par This divine Self contains all existences; all are situated in him, not
materially in essence, but in that extended spiritual conception of self-being of
which our too rigid notion of a material and etheric space is only a rendering
in the terms of the physical mind and senses. In reality all even here is
spiritual coexistence, identity and coincidence; but that is a fundamental truth
which we cannot apply until we get back to the supreme consciousness. Till
then such an idea would only be an intellectual concept to which nothing
corresponds in our practical experience. We have to say, then, using these
terms of relation in space and time, that the universe and all its beings exist in
the divine Self-existent as everything else exists in the spatial primacy of
ether. “It is as the great, the all-pervading aerial principle dwells in the etheric
that all existences dwell in Me, that is how you have to conceive of it,” says
the Teacher here to Arjuna. The universal existence is all-pervading and
infinite and the Self-existent too is all-pervading and infinite; but the
self-existent infinity is stable, static, immutable, the universal is an
all-pervading movement, \s{sarvatraga\,h}. The Self is one, not many; but the
universal expresses itself as all existence and is, as it seems, the sum of all
existences. One is Being; the other is Power of Being which moves and
creates and acts in the existence of the fundamental, supporting, immutable
Spirit. The Self does not dwell in all these existences or in any of them; that is
to say, he is not contained by any,—just as the ether here is not contained in
any form, though all forms are derived ultimately from the ether. Nor is he
contained in or constituted by all existences together—any more than the
ether is contained in the mobile extension of the aerial principle or is
constituted by the sum of its forms or its forces. But still in the movement
also is the Divine; he dwells in the many as the Lord in each being. Both
these relations are true of him at one and the same time. The one is a relation
of self-existence to the universal movement; the other, the immanence, is a
relation of the universal existence to its own forms. The one is a truth of
being in its all-containing
Page 319

immutability, self-existent: the other is a truth of Power of the same being
manifest in the government and information of its own self-veiling and
self-revealing movements.
\par The Supreme from above cosmic existence leans, it is here said, or
presses down upon his Nature to loose from it in an eternal cyclic recurrence
all that it contains in it, all that was once manifest and has become latent. All
existences act in the universe in subjection to this impelling movement and to
the laws of manifested being by which is expressed in cosmic harmonies the
phenomenon of the divine All-existence. The Jiva follows the cycle of its
becoming in the action of this divine Nature, \s{prak\,rti\.m m\=amik\=am}, \s{sv\=a\.m
prak\,rtim}, the “own nature” of the Divine. It becomes in the turns of her
progression this or that personality; it follows always the curve of its own law
of being as a manifestation of the divine Nature, whether in her higher and
direct or her lower and derived movement, whether in ignorance or in
knowledge; it returns out of her action into her immobility and silence in the
lapse of the cycle. Ignorant, it is subject to her cyclic whirl, not master of
itself, but dominated by her, \s{ava\'sa\,h prak\,rter va\'s\=at}; only by return to the
divine consciousness can it attain to mastery and freedom. The Divine too
follows the cycle, not as subject to it, but as its informing Spirit and guide, not
with his whole being involved in it, but with his power of being accompanying
and shaping it. He is the presiding control of his own action of Nature,
\s{adhyak\,sa},—not a spirit born in her, but the creative spirit who causes her
to produce all that appears in the manifestation. If in his power he
accompanies her and causes all her workings, he is outside it too, as if One
seated above her universal action in the supracosmic mastery, not attached to
her by any involving and mastering desire and not therefore bound by her
works, because he infinitely exceeds them and precedes them, is the same
before, during and after all their procession in the cycles of Time. All their
mutations make no difference to his immutable being. The silent self that
pervades and supports the cosmos is not affected by its changes because,
though supporting, it does not participate in them. This greatest supreme
supracosmic Self also is not affected because it
Page 320

exceeds and eternally transcends them.
\par But also since this action is the action of the divine Nature, \s{sv\=a
prak\,rti\,h}, and the divine Nature can never be separate from the Divine, in
everything she creates the Godhead must be immanent. That is a relation
which is not the whole truth of his being, but neither is it a truth which we can
at all afford to ignore. He is lodged in the human body. Those who ignore his
presence, who despise because of its masks the divinity in the human form,
are bewildered and befooled by the appearances of Nature and they cannot
realise that there is the secret Godhead within, whether conscious in
humanity as in the Avatar or veiled by his Maya. Those who are
great-souled, who are not shut up in their idea of ego, who open themselves
to the indwelling Divinity, know that the secret spirit in man which appears
here bounded by the limited human nature, is the same ineffable splendour
which we worship beyond as the supreme Godhead. They become aware of
the highest status of him in which he is master and lord of all existences and
yet see that in each existence he is still the supreme Deity and the indwelling
Godhead. All the rest is a self-limitation for the manifesting of the variations
of Nature in the cosmos. They see too that as it is his Nature which has
become all that is in the universe, everything here is in its inner fact nothing
but one Divine, all is Vasudeva, and they worship him not only as the
supreme Godhead beyond, but here in the world, in his oneness and in every
separate being. They see this truth and in this truth they live and act; him they
adore, live, serve both as the Transcendent of things and as God in the world
and as the Godhead in all that is, serve him with works of sacrifice, seek him
out by knowledge, see nothing else but him everywhere and lift their whole
being to him both in its self and in all its inward and outward nature. This they
know to be the large and perfect way; for it is the way of the whole truth of
the one supreme and universal and individual Godhead.
\note{Gita, IX. 4-11, 13-15, 34.}
Page 321

\par
\HN VI
\par
\ht Works, Devotion and Knowledge
\par\drop This then is the integral truth, the highest and widest knowledge.
The Divine is supracosmic, the eternal Parabrahman who supports with his
timeless and spaceless existence all this cosmic manifestation of his own
being and nature in Space and Time. He is the supreme spirit who ensouls
the forms and movements of the universe, Paramatman. He is the supernal
Person of whom all self and nature, all being and becoming in this or any
universe are the self-conception and the self-energising, Purushottama. He is
the ineffable Lord of all existence who by his spiritual control of his own
manifested Power in Nature unrolls the cycles of the world and the natural
evolution of creatures in the cycles, Parameshwara. From him the Jiva,
individual spirit, soul in Nature, existent by his being, conscious by the light of
his consciousness, empowered to knowledge, to will and to action by his will
and power, enjoying existence by his divine enjoyment of the cosmos, has
come here into the cosmic rounds.
\par The inner soul in man is here a partial self-manifestation of the Divine,
self-limited for the works of his Nature in the universe, \s{prak\,rtir
j\=iva-bh\=ut\=a}. In his spiritual essence the individual is one with the Divine. In
the works of the divine Prakriti he is one with him, yet there is an operative
difference and many deep relations with God in Nature and with God above
cosmic Nature. In the works of the lower appearance of Prakriti he seems
by an ignorance and egoistic separation to be quite other than the One and to
think, will, act, enjoy in this separative consciousness for the egoistic pleasure
and purpose of his personal existence in the universe and its surface relations
with other embodied minds and lives. But in fact all his being, all his thinking,
all his willing and action and enjoyment are only a reflection—egoistic and
perverted so long as he is in the ignorance—of the
Page 322

Divine's being, the Divine's thought, will, action and enjoyment of Nature. To
get back to this truth of himself is his direct means of salvation, his largest
and nearest door of escape from subjection to the Ignorance. Since he is a
spirit, a soul with a nature of mind and reason, of will and dynamic action, of
emotion and sensation and life's seeking for the delight of existence, it is by
turning all these powers Godwards that the return to the highest truth of
himself can be made entirely possible. He must know with the knowledge of
the supreme Self and Brahman; he must turn his love and adoration to the
supreme Person; he must subject his will and works to the supreme Lord of
cosmos. Then he passes from the lower to the divine Nature: he casts from
him the thought and will and works of the Ignorance and thinks, wills and
works in his divine identity as soul of that Soul, power and light of that Spirit;
he enjoys all the inner infinite of the Divine and no longer only these outward
touches, masks and appearances. Thus divinely living, thus directing his
whole self and soul and nature Godwards, he is taken up into the truest truth
of the supreme Brahman.
\par To know Vasudeva as all and live in that knowledge is the secret. He
knows him as the Self, immutable, continent of all as well as immanent in all
things. He draws back from the confused and perturbed whirl of the lower
nature to dwell in the still and inalienable calm and light of the self-existent
spirit. There he realises a constant unity with this self of the Divine that is
present in all existences and supports all cosmic movement and action and
phenomenon. He looks upward from this eternal unchanging spiritual
hypostasis of the mutable universe to the greater Eternal, the supracosmic,
the Real. He knows him as the divine Inhabitant in all things that are, the
Lord in the heart of man, the secret Ishwara, and removes the veil between
his natural being and this inner spiritual Master of his being. He makes his
will, thought and works one in knowledge with the Ishwara's, attuned by an
ever-present realisation to the sense of the indwelling Divinity, sees and
adores him in all and changes the whole human action to the highest meaning
of the divine nature. He knows him as the source and the substance of all
that
Page 323

is around him in the universe. All things that are he sees as at once in their
appearance the veils and in their secret trend the means and signs of
self-manifestation of that one unthinkable Reality and everywhere discovers
that oneness, Brahman, Purusha, Atman, Vasudeva, the Being that has
become all these creatures. Therefore too his whole inner existence comes
into tune and harmony with the Infinite now self-revealed in all that lives or is
within and around him and his whole outer existence turns into an exact
instrumentation of the cosmic purpose. He looks up through the Self to the
Parabrahman who there and here is the one and only existence. He looks up
through the divine Inhabitant in all to that supernal Person who in his supreme
status is beyond all habitation. He looks up through the Lord manifested in the
universe to the Supreme who exceeds and rules all his manifestation. Thus he
arises through a limitless unfolding of knowledge and upward vision and
aspiration to that to which he has turned with an all-compelling integrality,
\s{sarvabh\=avena}.
\par This integral turning of the soul Godwards bases royally the Gita's
synthesis of knowledge and works and devotion. To know God thus integrally
is to know him as One in the self and in all manifestation and beyond all
manifestation,—and all this unitedly and at once. And yet even so to know
him is not enough unless it is accompanied by an intense uplifting of the heart
and soul Godwards, unless it kindles a one-pointed and at the same time
all-embracing love, adoration, aspiration. Indeed the knowledge which is not
companioned by an aspiration and vivified by an uplifting is no true
knowledge, for it can be only an intellectual seeing and a barren cognitive
endeavour. The vision of God brings infallibly the adoration and passionate
seeking of the Divine,—a passion for the Divine in his self-existent being, but
also for the Divine in ourselves and for the Divine in all that is. To know with
the intellect is simply to understand and may be an effective
starting-point,—or, too, it may not be, and it will not be if there is no sincerity
in the knowledge, no urge towards inner realisation in the will, no power upon
the soul, no call in the spirit: for that would mean that the brain has
Page 324

externally understood, but inwardly the soul has seen nothing. True
knowledge is to know with the inner being, and when the inner being is
touched by the light, then it arises to embrace that which is seen, it yearns to
possess, it struggles to shape that in itself and itself to it, it labours to become
one with the glory of its vision. Knowledge in this sense is an awakening to
identity and, since the inner being realises itself by consciousness and delight,
by love, by possession and oneness with whatever of itself it has seen,
knowledge awakened must bring an overmastering impulse towards this true
and only perfect realisation. Here that which is known is not an externalised
object, but the divine Purusha, self and lord of all that we are. An all-seizing
delight in him and a deep and moved love and adoration of him must be the
inevitable result and is the very soul of this knowledge. And this adoration is
no isolated seeking of the heart, but an offering of the whole existence.
Therefore it must take also the form of a sacrifice; there is a giving of all our
works to the Ishwara, there is a surrender of all our active inward and
outward nature to the Godhead of our adoration in its every subjective and in
its every objective movement. All our subjective workings move in him and
they seek him, the Lord and Self, as the source and goal of their power and
endeavour. All our objective workings move out towards him in the world and
make him their object, initiate a service of God in the world of which the
controlling power is the Divinity within us in whom we are one self with the
universe and its creatures. For both world and self, Nature and the soul in her
are enlightened by the consciousness of the One, are inner and outer bodies
of the transcendent Purushottama. So comes a synthesis of mind and heart
and will in the one self and spirit and with it the synthesis of knowledge, love
and works in this integral union, this embracing God-realisation, this divine
Yoga.
\par But to arrive at this movement at all is difficult for the ego-bound nature.
And to arrive at its victorious and harmonious integrality is not easy even
when we have set our feet on the way finally and for ever. Mortal mind is
bewildered by its ignorant reliance upon veils and appearances; it sees only
the outward human body, human mind, human way of living and catches no
Page 325

liberating glimpse of the Divinity who is lodged in the creature. It ignores the
divinity within itself and cannot see it in other men, and even though the
Divine manifest himself in humanity as Avatar and Vibhuti, it is still blind and
ignores or despises the veiled Godhead, \s{avaj\=ananti m\=a\.m m\=u\,dh\=a m\=anu\,s\=i\.m
tanum \=a\'sritam}. And if it ignores him in the living creature, still less can it see
him in the objective world on which it looks out from its prison of separative
ego through the barred windows of the finite mind. It does not see God in the
universe; it knows nothing of the supreme Divinity who is master of these
planes full of various existences and dwells within them; it is blind to the
vision by which all in the world grows divine and the soul itself awakens to its
own inherent divinity and becomes of the Godhead, godlike. What it does see
readily, and to that it attaches itself with passion, is only the life of the ego
hunting after finite things for their own sake and for the satisfaction of the
earthly hunger of the intellect, body, senses. Those who have given
themselves up too entirely to this outward drive of the mentality, fall into the
hands of the lower nature, cling to it and make it their foundation. They
become a prey to the nature of the Rakshasa in man who sacrifices
everything to a violent and inordinate satisfaction of his separate vital ego and
makes that the dark godhead of his will and thought and action and
enjoyment. Or they are hurried onward in a fruitless cycle by the arrogant
self-will, self-sufficient thought, self-regarding act, self-satisfied and yet ever
unsatisfied intellectualised appetite of enjoyment of the Asuric nature. But to
live persistently in this separative ego-consciousness and make that the
centre of all our activities is to miss altogether the true self-awareness. The
charm it throws upon the misled instruments of the spirit is an enchantment
that chains life to a profitless circling. All its hope, action, knowledge are vain
things when judged by the divine and eternal standard, for it shuts out the
great hope, excludes the liberating action, banishes the illuminating
knowledge. It is a false knowledge that sees the phenomenon but misses the
truth of the phenomenon, a blind hope that chases after the transient but
misses the eternal, a sterile action whose every
Page 326

profit is annulled by loss and amounts to a perennial labour of \PNOTES
Sisyphus.
\note{Gita, IX. 11-12.}
\par The great-souled who open themselves to the light and largeness of the
diviner nature of which man is capable, are alone on the path narrow in the
beginning, inexpressibly wide in the end that leads to liberation and perfection.
The growth of the god in man is man's proper business; the steadfast turning
of this lower Asuric and Rakshasic into the divine nature is the carefully
hidden meaning of human life. As this growth increases, the veil falls and the
soul comes to see the greater significance of action and the real truth of
existence. The eye opens to the Godhead in man, to the Godhead in the
world; it sees inwardly and comes to know outwardly the infinite Spirit, the
Imperishable from whom all existences originate and who exists in all and by
him and in him all exist always. Therefore when this vision, this knowledge
seizes on the soul, its whole life-aspiration becomes a surpassing love and
fathomless adoration of the Divine and Infinite. The mind attaches itself
singly to the eternal, the spiritual, the living, the universal, the Real; it values
nothing but for its sake, it delights only in the all-blissful Purusha. All the word
and all the thought become one hymning of the universal greatness, Light,
Beauty, Power and Truth that has revealed itself in its glory to the human
spirit and a worship of the one supreme Soul and infinite Person. All the long
stress of the inner self to break outward becomes a form now of spiritual
endeavour and aspiration to possess the Divine in the soul and realise the
Divine in the nature. All life becomes a constant Yoga and unification of that
Divine and this human spirit. This is the manner of the integral devotion; it
creates a single uplifting of our whole being and nature through sacrifice by
the dedicated heart to the eternal Purushottama.
\note{IX. 13-14.}
\par Those who lay a predominant stress on knowledge, arrive to the same
point by an always increasing, engrossing, enforcing power of the vision of
the Divine on the soul and the nature. Theirs is the sacrifice of knowledge
and by an ineffable ecstasy
Page 327

of knowledge they come to the adoration of the Purushottama,
\s{j\~n\=ana-yaj\~nena yajanto m\=am up\=asate}. This is a comprehension filled with
Bhakti, because it is integral in its instruments, integral in its objective. It is
not a pursuit of the Supreme merely as an abstract unity or an indeterminable
Absolute. It is a heart-felt seeking and seizing of the Supreme and the
Universal, a pursuit of the Infinite in his infinity and of the Infinite in all that is
finite, a vision and embracing of the One in his oneness and of the One in all
his several principles, his innumerable visages, forces, forms, here, there,
everywhere, timelessly and in time, multiply, multitudinously, in endless
aspects of his Godhead, in beings without number, all his million universal
faces fronting us in the world and its creatures, \s{ekatvena p\,rthaktvena
bahudh\=a vi\'svatomukham.} This knowledge becomes easily an adoration, a
large devotion, a vast self-giving, an integral self-offering because it is the
knowledge of a Spirit, the contact of a Being, the embrace of a supreme and
universal Soul which claims all that we are even as it lavishes on us when we
approach it all the treasures of its endless delight of existence.
\note{IX. 15.} \LNOTES
\par The way of works too turns into an adoration and a devotion of
self-giving because it is an entire sacrifice of all our will and its activities to
the one Purushottama. The outward Vedic rite is a powerful symbol,
effective for a slighter though still a heavenward purpose; but the real
sacrifice is that inner oblation in which the Divine All becomes himself the
ritual action, the sacrifice and every single circumstance of the sacrifice. All
the working and forms of that inner rite are the self-ordinance and
self-expression of his power in us mounting by our aspiration towards the
source of its energies. The Divine Inhabitant becomes himself the flame and
the offering, because the flame is the Godward will and that will is God
himself within us. And the offering too is form and force of the constituent
Godhead in our nature and being; all that has been received from him is given
up to the service and the worship of its own Reality,
Page 328

its own supreme Truth and Origin. The Divine Thinker becomes himself the
sacred mantra; it is the Light of his being that expresses itself in the thought
directed Godward and is effective in the revealing word of splendour that
enshrines the thought's secret and in the rhythm that repeats for man the
rhythms of the Eternal. The illumining Godhead is himself the Veda and that
which is made known by the Veda. He is both the knowledge and the object
of the knowledge. The Rik, the Yajur, the Sama, the word of illumination
which lights up the mind with the rays of knowledge, the word of power for
the right ordaining of action, the word of calm and harmonious attainment for
the bringing of the divine desire of the spirit, are themselves the Brahman, the
Godhead. The mantra of the divine Consciousness brings its light of
revelation, the mantra of the divine Power its will of effectuation, the mantra
of the divine Ananda its equal fulfilment of the spiritual delight of existence.
All word and thought are an outflowering of the great OM,—OM, the Word,
the Eternal. Manifest in the forms of sensible objects, manifest in that
conscious play of creative self-conception of which forms and objects are the
figures, manifest behind in the self-gathered superconscient power of the
Infinite, OM is the sovereign source, seed, womb of thing and idea, form and
name,—it is itself, integrally, the supreme Intangible, the original Unity, the
timeless Mystery self-existent above all manifestation in supernal
being.
\note{AUM,—A the spirit of the gross and external, Virat, U the spirit of the
subtle and internal, Taijasa, M the spirit of the secret superconscient
omnipotence, Prajna, OM the Absolute, Turiya.—{\it Mandukya
Upanishad}.} This sacrifice is therefore at once works and adoration and
knowledge.
\note{IX. 16-17.}
\par To the soul that thus knows, adores, offers up all its workings in a great
self-surrender of its being to the Eternal, God is all and all is the Godhead. It
knows God as the Father of this world who nourishes and cherishes and
watches over his children. It knows God as the divine Mother who holds us in
her bosom, lavishes upon us the sweetness of her love and fills the universe
with her forms of beauty. It knows him as the first Creator from
Page 329

whom has originated all that originates and creates in space and time and
relation. It knows him as the Master and ordainer of all universal and of
every individual dispensation. The world and fate and uncertain eventuality
cannot terrify, the aspect of suffering and evil cannot bewilder the man who
has surrendered himself to the Eternal. God to the soul that sees is the path
and God is the goal of his journey, a path in which there is no self-losing and
a goal to which his wisely guided steps are surely arriving at every moment.
He knows the Godhead as the master of his and all being, the upholder of his
nature, the husband of the nature-soul, its lover and cherisher, the inner
witness of all his thoughts and actions. God is his house and country, the
refuge of his seekings and desires, the wise and close and benignant friend of
all beings. All birth and status and destruction of apparent existences is to his
vision and experience the One who brings forward, maintains and withdraws
his temporal self-manifestation in its system of perpetual recurrences. He
alone is the imperishable seed and origin of all that seem to be born and
perish and their eternal resting-place in their non-manifestation. It is he that
burns in the heat of the sun and the flame; it is he who is the plenty of the
rain and its withholding; he is all this physical Nature and her workings.
Death is his mask and immortality is his self-revelation. All that we call
existent is he and all that we look upon as non-existent still is there secret in
the Infinite and is part of the mysterious being of the Ineffable.
\note{IX. 17-19.}
\par Nothing but the highest knowledge and adoration, no other way than an
entire self-giving and surrender to this Highest who is all, will bring us to the
Highest. Other religion, other worship, other knowledge, other seeking has
always its fruits, but these are transient and limited to the enjoyment of divine
symbols and appearances. There are always open for our following
according to the balance of our mentality an outer and an inmost knowledge,
an outer and an inmost seeking. Outward religion is the worship of an
outward deity and the pursuit of an external beatitude: its devotees purify
their conduct from sin and attain
Page 330

to an active ethical righteousness in order to satisfy the fixed law, the
Shastra, the external dispensation; they perform the ceremonial symbol of the
outer communion. But their object is to secure after the mortal pleasure and
pain of earthly life the bliss of heavenly worlds, a greater happiness than
earth can give but still a personal and mundane enjoyment though in a larger
world than the field of this limited and suffering terrestrial nature. And to that
to which they aspire, they attain by faith and right endeavour; for material
existence and earthly activities are not the whole scope of our personal
becoming or the whole formula of the cosmos. Other worlds there are of a
larger felicity, \s{svargaloka\.m vi\'s\=alam}. Thus the Vedic ritualist of old
learned the exoteric sense of the triple Veda, purified himself from sin, drank
the wine of communion with the gods and sought by sacrifice and good deeds
the rewards of heaven. This firm belief in a Beyond and this seeking of a
diviner world secures to the soul in its passing the strength to attain to the
joys of heaven on which its faith and seeking were centred: but the return to
mortal existence imposes itself because the true aim of that existence has not
been found and realised. Here and not elsewhere the highest Godhead has to
be found, the soul's divine nature developed out of the imperfect physical
human nature and through unity with God and man and universe the whole
large truth of being discovered and lived and made visibly wonderful. That
completes the long cycle of our becoming and admits us to a supreme result;
that is the opportunity given to the soul by the human birth and, until that is
accomplished, it cannot cease. The God-lover advances constantly towards
this ultimate necessity of our birth in cosmos through a concentrated love and
adoration by which he makes the supreme and universal Divine the whole
object of his living—not either egoistic terrestrial satisfaction or the celestial
worlds—and the whole object of his thought and his seeing. To see nothing
but the Divine, to be at every moment in union with him, to love him in all
creatures and have the delight of him in all things is the whole condition of his
spiritual existence. His God-vision does not divorce him from life, nor does he
miss anything of the fullness of life; for God himself becomes the
spontaneous
Page 331

bringer to him of every good and of all his inner and outer getting and having,
\s{yoga-k\,sema\.m} \s{vah\=amyaham}. The joy of heaven and the joy of earth
are only a small shadow of his possessions; for as he grows into the Divine,
the Divine too flows out upon him with all the light, power and joy of an
infinite existence.
\note{IX. 20-22.}
\par Ordinary religion is a sacrifice to partial godheads other than the integral
Divinity. The Gita takes its direct examples from the old Vedic religion on its
exoteric side as it had then developed; it describes this outward worship as a
sacrifice to other godheads, \s{anya-devat\=a\,h}, to the gods, or to the divinised
Ancestors, or to elemental powers and spirits, \s{dev\=an}, \s{pit\.rn},
\s{bh\=ut\=ani}. Men consecrate their life and works ordinarily to partial powers
or aspects of the divine Existence as they see or conceive them—mostly
powers and aspects that ensoul to them things prominent in Nature and man
or else reflect to them their own humanity in a divine exceeding symbol. If
they do this with faith, then their faith is justified; for the Divine accepts
whatever symbol, form or conception of himself is present to the mind of the
worshipper, \s{y\=a\.m y\=a\.m tanu\.m \'sraddhay\=a arcati}, as it is said elsewhere, and
meets him according to the faith that is in him. All sincere religious belief and
practice is really a seeking after the one supreme and universal Godhead; for
he always is the sole master of man's sacrifice and askesis and infinite
enjoyer of his effort and aspiration. However small or low the form of the
worship, however limited the idea of the godhead, however restricted the
giving, the faith, the effort to get behind the veil of one's own ego-worship
and limitation by material Nature, it yet forms a thread of connection between
the soul of man and the All-soul and there is a response. Still the response,
the fruit of the adoration and offering is according to the knowledge, the faith
and the work and cannot exceed their limitations, and therefore from the
point of view of the greater God-knowledge, which alone gives the entire
truth of being and becoming, this inferior offering is not given according to the
true and highest law of the sacrifice. It is not founded on a knowledge of the
supreme Godhead in his integral
Page 332

existence and the true principles of his self-manifestation, but attaches itself
to external and partial appearances,—\s{na m\=am abhij\=ananti} \s{tattvena}.
Therefore its sacrifice too is limited in its object, largely egoistic in its motive,
partial and mistaken in its action and its giving, \s{yajanti}
\s{avidhi-p\=urvakam}. An entire seeing of the Divine is the condition of an
entire conscious self-surrender; the rest attains to things that are incomplete
and partial, and has to fall back from them and return to enlarge itself in a
greater seeking and wider God-experience. But to follow after the supreme
and universal Godhead alone and utterly is to attain to all knowledge and
result which other ways acquire, while yet one is not limited by any aspect,
though one finds the truth of him in all aspects. This movement embraces all
forms of divine being on its way to the supreme Purushottama.
\note{IX. 23-25.}
\par This absolute self-giving, this one-minded surrender is the devotion which
the Gita makes the crown of its synthesis. All action and effort are by this
devotion turned into an offering to the supreme and universal Godhead.
“Whatever thou doest, whatever thou enjoyest, whatever thou sacrificest,
whatever thou givest, whatever energy of tapasya, of the soul's will or effort
thou puttest forth, make it an offering unto Me.” Here the least, the slightest
circumstance of life, the most insignificant gift out of oneself or what one has,
the smallest action assumes a divine significance and it becomes an
acceptable offering to the Godhead who makes it a means for his possession
of the soul and life of the God-lover. The distinctions made by desire and ego
then disappear. As there is no straining after the good result of one's action,
no shunning of unhappy result, but all action and result are given up to the
Supreme to whom all work and fruit in the world belong for ever, there is no
farther bondage. For by an absolute self-giving all egoistic desire disappears
from the heart and there is a perfect union between the Divine and the
individual soul through an inner renunciation of its separate living. All will, all
action, all result become that of the Godhead, work divinely through the
purified and illumined nature and no
Page 333

longer belong to the limited personal ego. The finite nature thus surrendered
becomes a free channel of the Infinite; the soul in its spiritual being, uplifted
out of the ignorance and the limitation, returns to its oneness with the Eternal.
The Divine Eternal is the inhabitant in all existences; he is equal in all and the
equal friend, father, mother, creator, lover, supporter of all creatures. He is
the enemy of none and he is the partial lover of none; none has he cast out,
none has he eternally condemned, none has he favoured by any despotism of
arbitrary caprice: all at last equally come to him through their circlings in the
ignorance. But it is only this perfect adoration that can make this indwelling
of God in man and man in God a conscious thing and an engrossing and
perfect union. Love of the Highest and a total self-surrender are the straight
and swift way to this divine oneness.
\note{IX. 26-29.}
\par The equal Divine Presence in all of us makes no other preliminary
condition, if once this integral self-giving has been made in faith and in
sincerity and with a fundamental completeness. All have access to this gate,
all can enter into this temple: our mundane distinctions disappear in the
mansion of the All-lover. There the virtuous man is not preferred, nor the
sinner shut out from the Presence; together by this road the Brahmin pure of
life and exact in observance of the law and the outcaste born from a womb
of sin and sorrow and rejected of men can travel and find an equal and open
access to the supreme liberation and the highest dwelling in the Eternal. Man
and woman find their equal right before God; for the divine Spirit is no
respecter of persons or of social distinctions and restrictions: all can go
straight to him without intermediary or shackling condition. “If” says the
divine Teacher “even a man of very evil conduct turns to me with a sole and
entire love, he must be regarded as a saint, for the settled will of endeavour in
him is a right and complete will. Swiftly he becomes a soul of righteousness
and obtains eternal peace.” In other words a will of entire self-giving opens
wide all the gates of the spirit and brings in response an entire descent and
self-giving of the Godhead to the human being, and that at
Page 334

once reshapes and assimilates everything in us to the law of the divine
existence by a rapid transformation of the lower into the spiritual nature. The
will of self-giving forces away by its power the veil between God and man; it
annuls every error and annihilates every obstacle. Those who aspire in their
human strength by effort of knowledge or effort of virtue or effort of
laborious self-discipline, grow with much anxious difficulty towards the
Eternal; but when the soul gives up its ego and its works to the Divine, God
himself comes to us and takes up our burden. To the ignorant he brings the
light of the divine knowledge, to the feeble the power of the divine will, to the
sinner the liberation of the divine purity, to the suffering the infinite spiritual
joy and Ananda. Their weakness and the stumblings of their human strength
make no difference. “This is my word of promise,” cries the voice of the
Godhead to Arjuna, “that he who loves me shall not perish.” Previous effort
and preparation, the purity and the holiness of the Brahmin, the enlightened
strength of the king-sage great in works and knowledge have their value,
because they make it easier for the imperfect human creature to arrive at this
wide vision and self-surrender; but even without this preparation all who take
refuge in the divine Lover of man, the Vaishya once preoccupied with the
narrowness of wealth-getting and the labour of production, the Shudra
hampered by a thousand hard restrictions, woman shut in and stunted in her
growth by the narrow circle society has drawn around her self-expansion,
those too, \s{p\=apa-yonaya\,h}, on whom their past Karma has imposed even
the very worst of births, the outcaste, the Pariah, the Chandala, find at once
the gates of God opening before them. In the spiritual life all the external
distinctions of which men make so much because they appeal with an
oppressive force to the outward mind, cease before the equality of the divine
Light and the wide omnipotence of an impartial Power.
\note{IX. 30-32.}
\par The earthly world preoccupied with the dualities and bound to the
immediate transient relations of the hour and the moment is for man, so long
as he dwells here attached to these things
Page 335

and while he accepts the law they impose on him for the law of his life, a
world of struggle, suffering and sorrow. The way to liberation is to turn from
the outward to the inward, from the appearance created by the material life
which lays its burden on the mind and imprisons it in the grooves of the life
and the body to the divine Reality which waits to manifest itself through the
freedom of the spirit. Love of the world, the mask, must change into the love
of God, the Truth. Once this secret and inner Godhead is known and is
embraced, the whole being and the whole life will undergo a sovereign
uplifting and a marvellous transmutation. In place of the ignorance of the
lower Nature absorbed in its outward works and appearances the eye will
open to the vision of God everywhere, to the unity and universality of the
spirit. The world's sorrow and pain will disappear in the bliss of the
All-blissful; our weakness and error and sin will be changed into the
all-embracing and all-transforming strength, truth and purity of the Eternal.
To make the mind one with the divine consciousness, to make the whole of
our emotional nature one love of God everywhere, to make all our works one
sacrifice to the Lord of the worlds and all our worship and aspiration one
adoration of him and self-surrender, to direct the whole self Godwards in an
entire union is the way to rise out of a mundane into a divine existence. This
is the Gita's teaching of divine love and devotion, in which knowledge, works
and the heart's longing become one in a supreme unification, a merging of all
their divergences, an intertwining of all their threads, a high fusion, a wide
identifying movement.
\note{IX. 33-34.}
Page 336

\par
\HN VII
\par
\ht The Supreme Word of the Gita
\par\drop We have now got to the inmost kernel of the Gita's Yoga, the
whole living and breathing centre of its teaching. We can see now quite
clearly that the ascent of the limited human soul when it withdraws from the
ego and the lower nature into the immutable Self calm, silent and stable, was
only a first step, an initial change. And now too we can see why the Gita
from the first insisted on the Ishwara, the Godhead in the human form, who
speaks always of himself, “\s{aham}, \s{m\=am},” as of some great secret and
omnipresent Being, lord of all the worlds and master of the human soul, one
who is greater even than that immutable self-existence which is still and
unmoved for ever and abides for ever untouched by the subjective and
objective appearances of the natural universe.
\par All Yoga is a seeking after the Divine, a turn towards union with the
Eternal. According to the adequacy of our perception of the Divine and the
Eternal will be the way of the seeking, the depth and fullness of the union and
the integrality of the realisation. Man, the mental being, approaches the
Infinite through his finite mind and has to open some near gate of this finite
upon that Infinite. He seeks for some conception on which his mind is able to
seize, selects some power of his nature which by force of an absolute
self-heightening can reach out and lay its touch on the infinite Truth that in
itself is beyond his mental comprehension. Some face of that infinite
Truth—for, because it is infinite, it has numberless faces, words of its
meaning, self-suggestions—he attempts to see, so that by attaching himself to
it he can arrive through direct experience to the immeasurable reality it
figures. However narrow the gate may be, he is satisfied if it offers some
prospect into the wideness which attracts him, if it sets him on the way to the
fathomless profundity and unreachable heights of that which calls to his spirit.
And as he approaches it, so it
Page 337

receives him, \s{ye yath\=a m\=a\.m prapadyante}.
\par Philosophic mind attempts to attain to the Eternal by an abstractive
knowledge. The business of knowledge is to comprehend and for the finite
intellect that means to define and determine. But the only way to determine
the indeterminable is by some kind of universal negation, \s{neti neti}.
Therefore the mind proceeds to exclude from the conception of the Eternal
all that offers itself as limitable by the senses and the heart and the
understanding. An entire opposition is made between the Self and the
not-self, between an eternal, immutable, indefinable self-existence and all
forms of existence,—between Brahman and Maya, between the ineffable
Reality and all that undertakes to express, but cannot express the
Ineffable,—between Karma and Nirvana, between the ever continuous but
ever impermanent action and conception of the universal Energy and some
absolute ineffable supreme Negation of its action and conception which is
empty of all life and mentality and dynamic significance. That strong drive of
knowledge towards the Eternal leads away from everything that is transient.
It negates life in order to return to its source, cuts away from us all that we
seem to be in order to get from it to the nameless and impersonal reality of
our being. The desires of the heart, the works of the will and the conceptions
of the mind are rejected; even in the end knowledge itself is negated and
abolished in the Identical and Unknowable. By the way of an increasing
quietude ending in an absolute passivity the Maya-created soul or the bundle
of associations we call ourselves enters into annihilation of its idea of
personality, makes an end of the lie of living, disappears into Nirvana.
\par But this difficult abstractive method of self-negation, however it may
draw to it some exceptional natures, cannot satisfy universally the embodied
soul in man, because it does not give an outlet to all the straining of his
complex nature towards the perfect Eternal. Not only his abstracting
contemplative intellect but his yearning heart, his active will, his positive mind
in search of some Truth to which his existence and the existence of the world
is a manifold key, have their straining towards the Eternal and Infinite and
seek to find in it their divine Source and the justification
Page 338

of their being and their nature. From this need arise the religions of love and
works, whose strength is that they satisfy and lead Godwards the most active
and developed powers of our humanity,—for only by starting from these can
knowledge be effective. Even Buddhism with its austere and uncompromising
negation both of subjective self and objective things had still to found itself
initially on a divine discipline of works and to admit as a substitute for bhakti
the spiritualised emotionalism of a universal love and compassion, since so
only could it become an effective way for mankind, a truly liberating religion.
Even illusionist Mayavada with its ultralogical intolerance of action and the
creations of mentality had to allow a provisional and practical reality to man
and the universe and to God in the world in order to have a first foothold and
a feasible starting-point; it had to affirm what it denied in order to give some
reality to man's bondage and to his effort for liberation.
\par But the weakness of the kinetic and the emotional religions is that they
are too much absorbed in some divine Personality and in the divine values of
the finite. And, even when they have a conception of the infinite Godhead,
they do not give us the full satisfaction of knowledge because they do not
follow it out into its most ultimate and supernal tendencies. These religions
fall short of a complete absorption in the Eternal and the perfect union by
identity,—and yet to that identity in some other way, if not in the abstractive,
since there all oneness has its basis, the spirit that is in man must one day
arrive. On the other hand, the weakness of a contemplative quietistic
spirituality is that it arrives at this result by a too absolute abstraction and in
the end it turns into a nothing or a fiction the human soul whose aspiration
was yet all the time the whole sense of this attempt at union; for without the
soul and its aspiration liberation and union could have no meaning. The little
that this way of thinking recognises of his other powers of existence, it
relegates to an inferior preliminary action which never arrives at any full or
satisfying realisation in the Eternal and Infinite. Yet these things too which it
restricts unduly, the potent will, the strong yearning of love, the positive light
and all-embracing intuition
Page 339

of the conscious mental being are from the Divine, represent essential
powers of him and must have some justification in their Source and some
dynamic way of self-fulfilment in him. No God-knowledge can be integral,
perfect or universally satisfying which leaves unfulfilled their absolute claim,
no wisdom utterly wise which in its intolerant asceticism of search negates or
in the pride of pure knowledge belittles the spiritual reality behind these ways
of the Godhead.
\par The greatness of the central thought of the Gita in which all its threads
are gathered up and united, consists in the synthetic value of a conception
which recognises the whole nature of the soul of man in the universe and
validates by a large and wise unification its many-sided need of the supreme
and infinite Truth, Power, Love, Being to which our humanity turns in its
search for perfection and immortality and some highest joy and power and
peace. There is a strong and wide endeavour towards a comprehensive
spiritual view of God and man and universal existence. Not indeed that
everything without any exception is seized in these eighteen chapters, no
spiritual problem left for solution; but still so large a scheme is laid out that we
have only to fill in, to develop, to modify, to stress, to follow out points, to
work out hint and illuminate adumbration in order to find a clue to any further
claim of our intelligence and need of our spirit. The Gita itself does not evolve
any quite novel solution out of its own questionings. To arrive at the
comprehensiveness at which it aims, it goes back behind the great
philosophical systems to the original Vedanta of the Upanishads; for there we
have the widest and profoundest extant synthetic vision of spirit and man and
cosmos. But what is in the Upanishads undeveloped to the intelligence
because wrapped up in a luminous kernel of intuitive vision and symbolic
utterance, the Gita brings out in the light of a later intellectual thinking and
distinctive experience.
\par In the frame of its synthesis it admits the seeking of the abstractive
thinkers for the Indefinable, \s{anirde\'syam}, the ever unmanifest Immutable,
\s{avyaktam ak\,saram}. Those who devote themselves to this search, find,
they also, the Purushottama, the supreme Divine Person, \s{m\=am}, the Spirit
and highest Soul
Page 340

and Lord of things. For his utmost self-existent way of being is indeed an
unthinkable, \s{acintyar\=upam}, an unimaginable positive, an absolute
quintessence of all absolutes far beyond the determination of the intelligence.
The method of negative passivity, quietude, renunciation of life and works by
which men feel after this intangible Absolute is admitted and ratified in the
Gita's philosophy, but only with a minor permissive sanction. This negating
knowledge approaches the Eternal by one side only of the truth and that side
the most difficult to reach and follow for the embodied soul in Nature,
\s{du\,hkha\.m} \s{dehavadbhir av\=apyate}; it proceeds by a highly specialised,
even an unnecessarily arduous way, “narrow and difficult to tread as a
razor's edge.” Not by denying all relations, but through all relations is the
Divine Infinite naturally approachable to man and most easily, widely,
intimately seizable. This seeing is not after all the largest or the truest truth
that the Supreme is without any relations with the mental, vital, physical
existence of man in the universe, \s{avyavah\=aryam}, nor that what is
described as the empirical truth of things, the truth of relations,
\s{vyavah\=ara}, is altogether the opposite of the highest spiritual truth,
\s{param\=artha}. On the contrary there are a thousand relations by which the
supreme Eternal is secretly in contact and union with our human existence
and by all essential ways of our nature and of the world's nature,
\s{sarva-bh\=avena}, can that contact be made sensible and that union made
real to our soul, heart, will, intelligence, spirit. Therefore is this other way
natural and easy for man, \s{sukham \=aptum}. God does not make himself
difficult of approach to us: only one thing is needed, one demand made on us,
the single indomitable will to break through the veil of our ignorance and the
whole, the persistent seeking of the mind and heart and life for that which is
all the time near to it, within it, its own soul of being and spiritual essence and
the secret of its personality and its impersonality, its self and its nature. This
is our one difficulty; the rest the Master of our existence will himself see to
and accomplish, \s{aha\.m tv\=a\.m mok\,sayi\,sy\=ami m\=a \'suca\,h}.
\par In the very part of its teaching in which the Gita's synthesis leans most
towards the side of pure knowledge, we have
Page 341

seen that it constantly prepares for this fuller truth and more pregnant
experience. Indeed, it is implied in the very form the Gita gives to the
realisation of the self-existent Immutable. That immutable Self of all
existences seems indeed to stand back from any active intervention in the
workings of Nature; but it is not void of all relation whatever and remote
from all connection. It is our witness and supporter; it gives a silent and
impersonal sanction; it has even an impassive enjoyment. The many-sided
action of Nature is still possible even when the soul is poised in that calm
self-existence: for the witness soul is the immutable Purusha, and Purusha
has always some relation with Prakriti. But now the reason of this double
aspect of silence and of activity is revealed in its entire
significance,—because the silent all-pervading Self is only one side of the
truth of the divine Being. He who pervades the world as the one unchanging
self that supports all its mutations, is equally the Godhead in man, the Lord in
the heart of every creature, the conscient Cause and Master of all our
subjective becoming and all our inward-taking and outward-going objectivised
action. The Ishwara of the Yogins is one with the Brahman of the seeker of
knowledge, one supreme and universal Spirit, one supreme and universal
Godhead.
\par This Godhead is not the limited personal God of so many exoteric
religions; for those are all only partial and outward formations of this other,
this creative and directive, this personal side of his complete truth of
existence. This is the one supreme Person, Soul, Being, Purusha of whom all
godheads are aspects, all individual personality a limited development in
cosmic Nature. This Godhead is not a particularised name and form of
Divinity, \s{i\,s\,ta-devat\=a}, constructed by the intelligence or embodying the
special aspiration of the worshipper. All such names and forms are only
powers and faces of the one Deva who is the universal Lord of all
worshippers and all religions: but this is itself that universal Deity,
\s{deva-deva}. This Ishwara is not a reflection of the impersonal and
indeterminable Brahman in illusive Maya: for from beyond all cosmos as well
as within it he rules and is the Lord of the worlds and their creatures. He is
Page 342

Parabrahman who is Parameshwara, supreme Lord because he is the
supreme Self and Spirit, and from his highest original existence he originates
and governs the universe, not self-deceived, but with an all-knowing
omnipotence. Nor is the working of his divine Nature in the cosmos an
illusion whether of his or our consciousness. The only illusive Maya is the
ignorance of the lower Prakriti which is not a creator of non-existent things
on the impalpable background of the One and Absolute, but because of its
blind encumbered and limited working misrepresents to the human mind by
the figure of ego and other inadequate figures of mind, life and matter the
greater sense, the deeper realities of existence. There is a supreme, a divine
Nature which is the true creatrix of the universe. All creatures and all objects
are becomings of the one divine Being; all life is a working of the power of
the one Lord; all nature is a manifestation of the one Infinite. He is the
Godhead in man; the Jiva is spirit of his Spirit. He is the Godhead in the
universe; this world in Space and Time is his phenomenal self-extension.
\par In the unrolling of this comprehensive vision of existence and
super-existence the Yoga of the Gita finds its unified significance and
unexampled amplitude. This supreme Godhead is the one unchanging
imperishable Self in all that is; therefore to the spiritual sense of this
unchanging imperishable self man has to awake and to unify with it his inner
impersonal being. He is the Godhead in man who originates and directs all his
workings; therefore man has to awake to the Godhead within himself, to
know the divinity he houses, to rise out of all that veils and obscures it and to
become united with this inmost Self of his self, this greater consciousness of
his consciousness, this hidden Master of all his will and works, this Being
within him who is the fount and object of all his various becoming. He is the
Godhead whose divine nature, origin of all that we are, is thickly veiled by
these lower natural derivations; therefore man has to get back from his lower
apparent existence, imperfect and mortal, to his essential divine nature of
immortality and perfection. This Godhead is one in all things that are, the self
who lives in all and the self in whom all live and move; therefore man has to
Page 343

discover his spiritual unity with all creatures, to see all in the self and the self
in all beings, even to see all things and creatures as himself,
\s{\=atmaupamyena sarvatra}, and accordingly think, feel and act in all his
mind, will and living. This Godhead is the origin of all that is here or
elsewhere and by his Nature he has become all these innumerable
existences, \s{abh\=ut} \s{sarv\=a\,ni bh\=ut\=ani}; therefore man has to see and
adore the One in all things animate and inanimate, to worship the
manifestation in sun and star and flower, in man and every living creature, in
the forms and forces, qualities and powers of Nature, \s{v\=asudeva\,h sarvam
iti}. He has to make himself by divine vision and divine sympathy and finally
by a strong inner identity one universality with the universe. A passive
relationless identity excludes love and action, but this larger and richer
oneness fulfils itself by works and by a pure emotion: it becomes the source
and continent and substance and motive and divine purpose of all our acts
and feelings. \s{Kasmai dev\=aya havi\,s\=a vidhema}, to what Godhead shall we
give all our life and activities as an offering? This is that Godhead, this the
Lord who claims our sacrifice. A passive relationless identity excludes the joy
of adoration and devotion; but bhakti is the very soul and heart and summit of
this richer, completer, more intimate union. This Godhead is the fulfilment of
all relations, father, mother, lover, friend and refuge of the soul of every
creature. He is the one supreme and universal Deva, Atman, Purusha,
Brahman, Ishwara of the secret wisdom. He has manifested the world in
himself in all these ways by his divine Yoga: its multitudinous existences are
one in him and he is one in them in many aspects. To awaken to the
revelation of him in all these ways together is man's side of the same divine
Yoga.
\par To make it perfectly and indisputably clear that this is the supreme and
entire truth of his teaching, this the integral knowledge which he had
promised to reveal, the divine Avatar declares, in a brief reiteration of the
upshot of all that he has been saying, that this and no other is his supreme
word, \s{parama\.m vaca\,h}. “Again hearken to my supreme word,” \s{bh\=uya
eva \'s\,r\,nu me parama\.m vaca\,h}. This supreme word of the Gita is, we find,
first the explicit and unmistakable declaration that the highest
Page 344

worship and highest knowledge of the Eternal are the knowledge and the
adoration of him as the supreme and divine Origin of all that is in existence
and the mighty Lord of the world and its peoples of whose being all things are
the becomings. It is, secondly, the declaration of a unified knowledge and
bhakti as the supreme Yoga; that is the destined and the natural way given to
man to arrive at union with the eternal Godhead. And to make more
significant this definition of the way, to give an illuminating point to this
highest importance of bhakti founded upon and opening to knowledge and
made the basis and motive-power for divinely appointed works, the
acceptance of it by the heart and mind of the disciple is put as a condition for
the farther development by which the final command to action comes at last
to be given to the human instrument, Arjuna. “I will speak this supreme word
to thee” says the Godhead “from my will for thy soul's good, now that thy
heart is taking delight in me,” \s{te pr\=iyam\=a\,n\=aya vak\,sy\=ami}. For this delight
of the heart in God is the whole constituent and essence of true bhakti,
\s{bhajanti pr\=iti-p\=urvakam}. As soon as the supreme word is given, Arjuna is
made to utter his acceptance of it and to ask for a practical way of seeing
God in all things in Nature, and from that question immediately and naturally
there develops the vision of the Divine as the Spirit of the universe and there
arises the tremendous command to the world-action.
\note{Gita, X. 1-18.}
\par The idea of the Divine on which the Gita insists as the secret of the
whole mystery of existence, the knowledge that leads to liberation, is one that
bridges the opposition between the cosmic procession in Time and a
supracosmic eternity without denying either of them or taking anything from
the reality of either. It harmonises the pantheistic, the theistic and the highest
transcendental terms of our spiritual conception and spiritual experience. The
Divine is the unborn Eternal who has no origin; there is and can be nothing
before him from which he proceeds, because he is one and timeless and
absolute. “Neither the gods nor the great Rishis know any birth of
me.\sdots . . .  He who knows
Page 345

me as the unborn without origin\sdots . . .  ” are the opening utterances of
this supreme word. And it gives the high promise that this knowledge, not
limiting, not intellectual, but pure and spiritual,—for the form and nature, if we
can use such language, of this transcendental Being, his \s{svar\=upa}, are
necessarily unthinkable by the mind, \s{acintyar\=upa},—liberates mortal man
from all confusion of ignorance and from all bondage of sin, suffering and
evil, \s{yo vetti asamm\=u\,dha\,h sa martye\,su sarva-p\=apai\,h pramucyate}. The
human soul that can dwell in the light of this supreme spiritual knowledge is
lifted by it beyond the ideative or sensible formulations of the universe. It
rises into the ineffable power of an all-exceeding, yet all-fulfilling identity, the
same beyond and here. This spiritual experience of the transcendental Infinite
breaks down the limitations of the pantheistic conception of existence. The
infinite of a cosmic monism which makes God and the universe one, tries to
imprison the Divine in his world manifestation and leaves us that as our sole
possible means of knowing him; but this experience liberates us into the
timeless and spaceless Eternal. “Neither the Gods nor the Titans know thy
manifestation” cries Arjuna in his reply: the whole universe or even
numberless universes cannot manifest him, cannot contain his ineffable light
and infinite greatness. All other lesser God-knowledge has its truth only by
dependence on the ever unmanifested and ineffable reality of the
transcendent Godhead.
\par But at the same time the divine Transcendence is not a negation, nor is it
an Absolute empty of all relation to the universe. It is a supreme positive, it is
an absolute of all absolutes. All cosmic relations derive from this Supreme; all
cosmic existences return to it and find in it alone their true and immeasurable
existence. “For I am altogether and in every way the origin of the gods and
the great Rishis.” The gods are the great undying Powers and immortal
Personalities who consciously inform, constitute, preside over the subjective
and objective forces of the cosmos. The gods are spiritual forms of the
eternal and original Deity who descend from him into the many processes of
the world. Multitudinous, universal, the gods weave out of the primary
principles of being and its thousand complexities the whole web
Page 346

of this diversified existence of the One. All their own existence, nature,
power, process proceeds in every way, in every principle, in its every strand
from the truth of the transcendent Ineffable. Nothing is independently created
here, nothing is caused self-sufficiently by these divine agents; everything
finds its origin, cause, first spiritual reason for being and will to be in the
absolute and supreme Godhead,—\s{aham \=adi\,h sarva\'sa\,h}. Nothing in the
universe has its real cause in the universe; all proceeds from this supernal
Existence.
\par The great Rishis, called here as in the Veda the seven original Seers,
\s{mahar\,saya\,h sapta p\=urve}, the seven Ancients of the world, are
intelligence-powers of that divine Wisdom which has evolved all things out of
its own self-conscious infinitude, \s{praj\~n\=a pur\=a\,n\=i},—developed them down
the range of the seven principles of its own essence. These Rishis embody
the all-upholding, all-illumining, all-manifesting seven Thoughts of the Veda,
\s{sapta dhiya\,h},—the Upanishad speaks of all things as being arranged in
septettes, \s{sapta sapta}. Along with these are coupled the four eternal
Manus, fathers of man,—for the active nature of the Godhead is fourfold and
humanity expresses this nature in its fourfold character. These also, as their
name implies, are mental beings. Creators of all this life that depends on
manifest or latent mind for its action, from them are all these living creatures
in the world; all are their children and offspring, \s{ye\,s\=a\.m loka im\=a\,h praj\=a\,h}.
And these great Rishis and these Manus are themselves perpetual mental
becomings of the supreme Soul
\note{\s{mad-bh\=av\=a m\=anas\=a j\=at\=a\,h}.} and born out of his spiritual
transcendence into cosmic Nature,—originators, but he the origin of all that
originates in the universe. Spirit of all spirits, Soul of all souls, Mind of all
mind, Life of all life, Substance of all form, this transcendent Absolute is no
complete opposite of all we are, but on the contrary the originating and
illuminating Absolute of all the principles and powers of our and the world's
being and nature.
\par This transcendent Origin of our existence is not separated
Page 347

from us by any unbridgeable gulf and does not disown the creatures that
derive from him or condemn them to be only the figments of an illusion. He is
the Being, all are his becomings. He does not create out of a void, out of a
Nihil or out of an unsubstantial matrix of dream. Out of himself he creates, in
himself he becomes; all are in his being and all is of his being. This truth
admits and exceeds the pantheistic seeing of things. Vasudeva is all,
\s{v\=asudeva\,h sarvam}; but Vasudeva is all that appears in the cosmos
because he is too all that does not appear in it, all that is never manifested.
His being is in no way limited by his becoming; he is in no degree bound by
this world of relations. Even in becoming all he is still a Transcendence; even
in assuming finite forms he is always the Infinite. Nature, Prakriti, is in her
essence his spiritual power, self-power, \s{\=atma\'sakti}; this spiritual
self-power develops infinite primal qualities of becoming in the inwardness of
things and turns them into an external surface of form and action. For in her
essential, secret and divine order the spiritual truth of each and all comes
first, a thing of her deep identities; their psychological truth of quality and
nature is dependent on the spiritual for all in it that is authentic, it derives from
the spirit; least in necessity, last in order the objective truth of form and action
derives from inner quality of nature and depends on it for all these variable
presentations of existence here in the external order. Or in other words, the
objective fact is only an expression of a sum of soul factors and these go
back always to a spiritual cause of their appearance.
\par This finite outward becoming is an expressive phenomenon of the divine
Infinite. Nature is, secondarily, the lower Nature, a subordinate variable
development of a few selective combinations out of the many possibilities of
the Infinite. Evolved out of essential and psychological quality of being and
becoming, \s{svabh\=ava}, these combinations of form and energy, action and
movement exist for a quite limited relation and mutual experience in the
cosmic oneness. And in this lower, outward and apparent order of things
Nature as an expressive power of the Godhead is disfigured by the
perversions of an obscure cosmic Ignorance and her divine significances lost
in the materialised,
Page 348

separative and egoistic mechanism of our mental and vital experience. But
still here also all is from the supreme Godhead, a birth, a becoming, an
evolution,
\note{\s{prabhava}, \s{bh\=ava}, \s{prav\,rtti}.} a process of development
through action of Nature out of the Transcendent. \s{Aha\.m sarvasya
prabhavo matta\,h sarva\.m pravartate}; “I am the birth of everything and from
me all proceeds into development of action and movement.” Not only is this
true of all that we call good or praise and recognise as divine, all that is
luminous, sattwic, ethical, peace-giving, spiritually joy-giving, “understanding
and knowledge and freedom from the bewilderment of the Ignorance,
forgiveness and truth and self-government and calm of inner control,
non-injuring and equality, contentment and austerity and giving.” It is true also
of the oppositions that perplex the mortal mind and bring in ignorance and its
bewilderment, “grief and pleasure, coming into being and destruction, fear
and fearlessness, glory and ingloriousness” with all the rest of the interplay of
light and darkness, all the myriad mixed threads that quiver so painfully and
yet with a constant stimulation through the entanglement of our nervous mind
and its ignorant subjectivities. All here in their separate diversities are
subjective becomings of existences in the one great Becoming and they get
their birth and being from Him who transcends them. The Transcendent
knows and originates these things, but is not caught as in a web in that
diversified knowledge and is not overcome by his creation. We must observe
here the emphatic collocation of the three words from the verb \s{bh\=u}, to
become, \s{bhavanti}, \s{bh\=av\=a\,h}, \s{bh\=ut\=an\=am}. All existences are
becomings of the Divine, \s{bh\=ut\=ani}; all subjective states and movements
are his and their psychological becomings, \s{bh\=av\=a\,h}. These even, our
lesser subjective conditions and their apparent results no less than the highest
spiritual states, are all becomings from the supreme Being,
\note{Cf. the Upanishad, \s{\=atm\=a eva abh\=ut sarv\=a\,ni bh\=ut\=ani}, the Self has
become all existences, with this contained significance in the choice of the
words, the Self-existent has become all these becomings.} \s{bhavanti matta
eva}. The Gita recognises and stresses the distinction between Being and
becoming, but does
Page 349

not turn it into an opposition. For that would be to abrogate the universal
oneness. The Godhead is one in his transcendence, one all-supporting Self of
things, one in the unity of his cosmic nature. These three are one Godhead;
all derives from him, all becomes from his being, all is eternal portion or
temporal expression of the Eternal. In the Transcendence, in the Absolute, if
we are to follow the Gita, we must look, not for a supreme negation of all
things, but for the positive key of their mystery, the reconciling secret of their
existence.
\par But there is another supreme reality of the Infinite that must also be
recognised as an indispensable element of the liberating knowledge. This
reality is that of the transcendent downlook as well as the close immanent
presence of the divine government of the universe. The Supreme who
becomes all creation, yet infinitely transcends it, is not a will-less cause aloof
from his creation. He is not an involuntary originator who disowns all
responsibility for these results of his universal Power or casts them upon an
illusive consciousness entirely different from his own or leaves them to a
mechanical Law or to a Demiurge or to a Manichean conflict of Principles.
He is not an aloof and indifferent Witness who waits impassively for all to
abolish itself or return to its unmoved original principle. He is the mighty lord
of the worlds and peoples, \s{loka-mahe\'svara}, and governs all not only from
within but from above, from his supreme transcendence. Cosmos cannot be
governed by a Power that does not transcend cosmos. A divine government
implies the free mastery of an omnipotent Ruler and not an automatic force
or mechanical law of determinative becoming limited by the apparent nature
of the cosmos. This is the theistic seeing of the universe, but it is no shrinking
and gingerly theism afraid of the world's contradictions, but one which sees
God as the omniscient and omnipotent, the sole original Being who manifests
in himself all, whatever it may be, good and evil, pain and pleasure, light and
darkness as stuff of his own existence and governs himself what in himself
he has manifested. Unaffected by its oppositions, unbound by his creation,
exceeding, yet intimately related to this Nature and closely one with her
creatures, their
Page 350

Spirit, Self, highest Soul, Lord, Lover, Friend, Refuge, he is ever leading them
from within them and from above through the mortal appearances of
ignorance and suffering and sin and evil, ever leading each through his nature
and all through universal Nature towards a supreme light and bliss and
immortality and transcendence. This is the fullness of the liberating
knowledge. It is a knowledge of the Divine within us and in the world as at
the same time a transcendent Infinite. An Absolute who has become all that
is by his divine Nature, his effective power of Spirit, he governs all from his
transcendence. He is intimately present within every creature and the cause,
ruler, director of all cosmic happenings and yet is he far too great, mighty and
infinite to be limited by his creation.
\par This character of the knowledge is emphasised in three separate verses
of promise. “Whosoever knows me,” says the Godhead, “as the unborn who
is without origin, mighty lord of the worlds and peoples, lives unbewildered
among mortals and is delivered from all sin and evil.\sdots . . .  Whosoever
knows in its right principles this my pervading lordship and this my Yoga (the
divine Yoga, \s{ai\'svara yoga}, by which the Transcendent is one with all
existences, even while more than them all, and dwells in them and contains
them as becomings of his own Nature), unites himself to me by an
untrembling Yoga.\sdots . . .  The wise hold me for the birth of each and all,
hold each and all as developing from me its action and movement, and so
holding they love and adore me\sdots . . .  and I give them the Yoga of the
understanding by which they come to me and I destroy for them the darkness
which is born of the ignorance.” These results must arise inevitably from the
very nature of the knowledge and from the very nature of the Yoga which
converts that knowledge into spiritual growth and spiritual experience. For all
the perplexity of man's mind and action, all the stumbling, insecurity and
affliction of his mind, his will, his ethical turn, his emotional, sensational and
vital urgings can be traced back to the groping and bewildered cognition and
volition natural to his sense-obscured mortal mind in the body, \s{sammoha}.
But when he sees the divine Origin of all things, when he looks steadily from
the cosmic appearance to its transcendent
Page 351

Reality and back from that Reality to the appearance, he is then delivered
from this bewilderment of the mind, will, heart and senses, he walks
enlightened and free, \s{asamm\=u\,dha\,h martye\,su}. Assigning to everything its
supernal and real and not any longer only its present and apparent value, he
finds the hidden links and connections; he consciously directs all life and act
to their high and true object and governs them by the light and power which
comes to him from the Godhead within him. Thus he escapes from the wrong
cognition, the wrong mental and volitional reaction, the wrong sensational
reception and impulse which here originate sin and error and suffering,
\s{sarva-p\=apai\,h pramucyate}. For living thus in the transcendent and
universal he sees his own and every other individuality in their greater values
and is released from the falsehood and ignorance of his separative and
egoistic will and knowledge. That is always the essence of the spiritual
liberation.
\par The wisdom of the liberated man is not then, in the view of the Gita, a
consciousness of abstracted and unrelated impersonality, a do-nothing
quietude. For the mind and soul of the liberated man are firmly settled in a
constant sense, an integral feeling of the pervasion of the world by the
actuating and directing presence of the divine Master of the universe,
\s{et\=a\.m vibh\=uti\.m mama yo vetti}. He is aware of his spirit's transcendence
of the cosmic order, but he is aware also of his oneness with it by the divine
Yoga, \s{yoga\.m ca mama}. And he sees each aspect of the transcendent,
the cosmic and the individual existence in its right relation to the supreme
Truth and puts all in their right place in the unity of the divine Yoga. He no
longer sees each thing in its separateness,—the separate seeing that leaves
all either unexplained or one-sided to the experiencing consciousness. Nor
does he see all confusedly together,—the confused seeing that gives a wrong
light and a chaotic action. Secure in the transcendence, he is not affected by
the cosmic stress and the turmoil of Time and circumstance. Untroubled in
the midst of all this creation and destruction of things, his spirit adheres to an
unshaken and untrembling, an unvacillating Yoga of union with the eternal
and spiritual in the universe. He watches through it all
Page 352

the divine persistence of the Master of the Yoga and acts out of a tranquil
universality and oneness with all things and creatures. And this close contact
with all things implies no involution of soul and mind in the separative lower
nature, because his basis of spiritual experience is not the inferior
phenomenal form and movement but the inner All and the supreme
Transcendence. He becomes of like nature and law of being with the Divine,
\s{s\=adharmyam \=agata\,h}, transcendent even in universality of spirit, universal
even in the individuality of mind, life and body. By this Yoga once perfected,
undeviating and fixed, \s{avikampena yogena yujyate}, he is able to take up
whatever poise of nature, assume whatever human condition, do whatever
world-action without any fall from his oneness with the divine Self, without
any loss of his constant communion with the Master of
existence.
\note{\s{sarvath\=a vartam\=ano'pi sa yog\=i mayi vartate.}}
\par This knowledge translated into the affective, emotional, temperamental
plane becomes a calm love and intense adoration of the original and
transcendental Godhead above us, the ever-present Master of all things here,
God in man, God in Nature. It is at first a wisdom of the intelligence, the
\s{buddhi}; but that is accompanied by a moved spiritualised state of the
affective nature,
\note{\s{budh\=a bh\=ava-samanvit\=a\,h.}} \s{bh\=ava}. This change of the heart
and mind is the beginning of a total change of all the nature. A new inner
birth and becoming prepares us for oneness with the supreme object of our
love and adoration, \s{madbh\=av\=aya}. There is an intense delight of love in the
greatness and beauty and perfection of this divine Being now seen
everywhere in the world and above it, \s{pr\=iti}. That deeper ecstasy assumes
the place of the scattered and external pleasure of the mind in existence or
rather it draws all other delight into it and transforms by a marvellous
alchemy the mind's and the heart's feelings and all sense movements. The
whole consciousness becomes full of the Godhead and replete with his
answering consciousness; the whole life flows into one sea of
bliss-experience. All the speech and thought of such God-lovers becomes a
mutual utterance and understanding of the
Page 353

Divine. In that one joy is concentrated all the contentment of the being, all the
play and pleasure of the nature. There is a continual union from moment to
moment in the thought and memory, there is an unbroken continuity of the
experience of oneness in the spirit. And from the moment that this inner state
begins, even in the stage of imperfection, the Divine confirms it by the
perfect Yoga of the will and intelligence. He uplifts the blazing lamp of
knowledge within us, he destroys the ignorance of the separative mind and
will, he stands revealed in the human spirit. By the Yoga of the will and
intelligence founded on an illumined union of works and knowledge the
transition was effected from our lower troubled mind-ranges to the immutable
calm of the witnessing Soul above the active nature. But now by this greater
yoga of the Buddhi founded on an illumined union of love and adoration with
an all-comprehending knowledge the soul rises in a vast ecstasy to the whole
transcendental truth of the absolute and all-originating Godhead. The Eternal
is fulfilled in the individual spirit and individual nature; the individual spirit is
exalted from birth in time to the infinitudes of the Eternal.
Page 354

\par
\HN VIII
\par
\ht God in Power of Becoming
\par\drop A very important step has been reached, a decisive statement of its
metaphysical and psychological synthesis has been added to the development
of the Gita's gospel of spiritual liberation and divine works. The Godhead has
been revealed in thought to Arjuna; he has been made visible to the mind's
search and the heart's seeing as the supreme and universal Being, the
supernal and universal Person, the inward-dwelling Master of our existence
for whom man's knowledge, will and adoration were seeking through the
mists of the Ignorance. There remains only the vision of the multiple Virat
Purusha to complete the revelation on one more of its many sides.
\par The metaphysical synthesis is complete. Sankhya has been admitted for
the separation of the soul from the lower nature,—a separation that must be
effected by self-knowledge through the discriminating reason and by
transcendence of our subjection to the three gunas constituent of that nature.
It has been completed and its limitations exceeded by a large revelation of the
unity of the supreme Soul and supreme Nature, \s{para puru\,sa}, \s{par\=a
prak\,rti}. Vedanta of the philosophers has been admitted for the
self-effacement of the natural separative personality built round the ego. Its
method has been used to replace the little personal by the large impersonal
being, to annul the separative illusion in the unity of the Brahman and to
substitute for the blind seeing of the ego the truer vision of all things in one
Self and one Self in all things. Its truth has been completed by the impartial
revelation of the Parabrahman from whom originate both the mobile and the
immobile, the mutable and the immutable, the action and the silence. Its
possible limitations have been transcended by the intimate revelation of the
supreme Soul and Lord who becomes here in all Nature, manifests himself in
all personality and puts forth the power of his Nature in all action. Yoga has
Page 355

been admitted for the self-surrender of the will, mind, heart, all the
psychological being to the Ishwara, the divine Lord of the nature. It has been
completed by the revelation of the supernal Master of existence as the
original Godhead of whom the Jiva is the partial being in Nature. Its possible
limitations have been exceeded by the soul's seeing of all things as the Lord
in the light of a perfect spiritual oneness.
\par There results an integral vision of the Divine Existent at once as the
transcendent Reality, supracosmic origin of cosmos, as the impersonal Self of
all things, calm continent of the cosmos, and as the immanent Divinity in all
beings, personalities, objects, powers and qualities, the Immanent who is the
constituent self, the effective nature and the inward and outward becoming of
all existences. The Yoga of knowledge has been fulfilled sovereignly in this
integral seeing and knowing of the One. The Yoga of works has been
crowned by the surrender of all works to their Master,—for the natural man
is now only an instrument of his will. The Yoga of love and adoration has
been declared in its amplest forms. The intense consummation of knowledge
and works, love conducts to a crowning union of soul and Oversoul in a
highest amplitude. In that union the revelations of knowledge are made real to
the heart as well as to the intelligence. In that union the difficult sacrifice of
self in an instrumental action becomes the easy, free and blissful expression
of a living oneness. The whole means of the spiritual liberation has been
given; the whole foundation of the divine action has been constructed.
\par Arjuna accepts the entire knowledge that has thus been given to him by
the divine Teacher. His mind is already delivered from its doubts and
seekings; his heart, turned now from the outward aspect of the world, from
its baffling appearance to its supreme sense and origin and its inner realities,
is already released from sorrow and affliction and touched with the ineffable
gladness of a divine revelation. The language which he is made to use in
voicing his acceptance is such as to emphasise and insist once again on the
profound integrality of this knowledge and its all-embracing finality and
fullness. He accepts first the Avatar, the Godhead in man who is speaking to
him as the supreme
Page 356

Brahman, as the supracosmic All and Absolute of existence in which the soul
can dwell when it rises out of this manifestation and this partial becoming to
its source, \s{para\.m brahma}, \s{para\.m dh\=ama}. He accepts him as the
supreme purity of the ever free Existence to which one arrives through the
effacement of ego in the self's immutable impersonality calm and still for
ever, \s{pavitra\.m paramam}. He accepts him next as the one Permanent, the
eternal Soul, the divine Purusha, \s{puru\,sa\.m \'s\=a\'svata\.m divyam}. He acclaims
in him the original Godhead, adores the Unborn who is the pervading,
indwelling, self-extending master of all existence, \s{\=adi-devam aja\.m
vibhum}. He accepts him therefore not only as that Wonderful who is beyond
expression of any kind, for nothing is sufficient to manifest him,—“neither the
Gods nor the Titans, O blessed Lord, know thy manifestation,” \s{na hi te
bhagavan vyakti\.m vidur dev\=a na d\=anav\=a\,h},—but as the lord of all existences
and the one divine efficient cause of all their becoming, God of the gods from
whom all godheads have sprung, master of the universe who manifests and
governs it from above by the power of his supreme and his universal Nature,
\s{bh\=uta-bh\=avana bh\=ute\'sa deva-deva jagat-pate}. And lastly he accepts him
as that Vasudeva in and around us who is all things here by virtue of the
world-pervading, all-inhabiting, all-constituting master powers of his
becoming, \s{vibh\=utaya\,h}, “the sovereign powers of thy becoming by which
thou standest pervading these worlds,” \s{y\=abhir vibh\=utibhir lok\=an im\=a\.ms
tva\.m vy\=apya ti\,s\,thasi}.
\note{Gita, X. 12-15.} \PNOTES
\par He has accepted the truth with the adoration of his heart, the submission
of his will and the understanding of his intelligence. He is already prepared to
act as the divine instrument in this knowledge and with this self-surrender.
But a desire for a deeper constant spiritual realisation has been awakened in
his heart and will. This is a truth which is evident only to the supreme Soul in
its own self-knowledge,—for, cries Arjuna, “thou alone, O Purushottama,
knowest thyself by thyself,” \s{\=atman\=a \=atm\=ana\.m vettha}. This is a
knowledge that comes by spiritual identity and the unaided heart, will,
intelligence of the natural man cannot
Page 357

arrive at it by their own motion and can only get at imperfect mental
reflections that reveal less than they conceal and disfigure. This is a secret
wisdom which one must hear from the seers who have seen the face of this
Truth, have heard its word and have become one with it in self and spirit. “All
the Rishis say this of thee and the divine seer Narada, Asita, Devala,
Vyasa.” Or else one must receive it from within by revelation and inspiration
from the inner Godhead who lifts in us the blazing lamp of knowledge.
\s{Svaya\~ncaiva brav\=i\,si me}, “and thou thyself sayest it to me.” Once
revealed, it has to be accepted by the assent of the mind, the consent of the
will and the heart's delight and submission, the three elements of the complete
mental faith, \s{\'sraddh\=a}. It is so that Arjuna has accepted it; “all this that
thou sayest, my mind holds for the truth.” But still there will remain the need
of that deeper possession in the very self of our being out from its most
intimate psychic centre, the soul's demand for that inexpressible permanent
spiritual realisation of which the mental is only a preliminary or a shadow and
without which there cannot be a complete union with the Eternal.
\par Now the way to arrive at that realisation has been given to Arjuna. And
so far as regards the great self-evident divine principles, these do not baffle
the mind; it can open to the idea of the supreme Godhead, to the experience
of the immutable Self, to the direct perception of the immanent Divinity, to
the contact of the conscient universal Being. One can, once the mind is
illumined with the idea, follow readily the way and, with whatever preliminary
difficult effort to exceed the normal mental perceptions, come in the end to
the self-experience of these essential truths that stand behind our and all
existence, \s{\=atman\=a \=atm\=anam}. One can do it with this readiness because
these, once conceived, are evidently divine realities; there is nothing in our
mental associations to prevent us from admitting God in these high aspects.
But the difficulty is to see him in the apparent truths of existence, to detect
him in this fact of Nature and in these disguising phenomena of the world's
becoming; for here all is opposed to the sublimity of this unifying conception.
How can we consent to see the Divine as man and animal being and
Page 358

inanimate object, in the noble and the low, the sweet and the terrible, the good
and the evil? If, assenting to some idea of God extended in the things of the
cosmos, we see him in ideal light of knowledge and greatness of power and
charm of beauty and beneficence of love and ample largeness of spirit, how
shall we avoid the breaking of the unity by their opposites which in actual fact
cling to these high things and envelop them and obscure? And if in spite of
the limitations of human mind and nature we can see God in the man of God,
how shall we see him in those who oppose him and represent in act and
nature all that we conceive of as undivine? If Narayana is without difficulty
visible in the sage and the saint, how shall he be easily visible to us in the
sinner, the criminal, the harlot and the outcaste? To all the differentiations of
the world-existence the sage, looking everywhere for the supreme purity and
oneness, returns the austere cry, “not this, not this,” \s{neti neti}. Even if to
many things in the world we give a willing or reluctant assent and admit the
Divine in the universe, still before most must not the mind persist in that cry
“not this, not this”? Here constantly the assent of the understanding, the
consent of the will and the heart's faith become difficult to a human mentality
anchored always on phenomenon and appearance. At least some compelling
indications are needed, some links and bridges, some supports to the difficult
effort at oneness.
\par Arjuna, though he accepts the revelation of Vasudeva as all and though
his heart is full of the delight of it,—for already he finds that it is delivering
him from the perplexity and stumbling differentiations of his mind which was
crying for a clue, a guiding truth amid the bewildering problems of a world of
oppositions, and it is to his hearing the nectar of immortality,
\s{am\,rtam},—yet feels the need of such supports and indices. He feels that
they are indispensable to overcome the difficulty of a complete and firm
realisation; for how else can this knowledge be made a thing of the heart and
life? He requires guiding indications, asks Krishna even for a complete and
detailed enumeration of the sovereign powers of his becoming and desires
that nothing shall be left out of the vision, nothing remain to baffle him. “Thou
Page 359

shouldst tell me” he says “of thy divine self-manifestations in thy sovereign
power of becoming, \s{divy\=a \=atma-vibh\=utaya\,h}, all without
exception,—\s{a\'se\,se\,na}, nothing omitted,—thy Vibhutis by which thou
pervadest these worlds and peoples. How shall I know thee, O Yogin, by
thinking of thee everywhere at all moments and in what pre-eminent
becomings should I think of thee?” This Yoga by which thou art one with all
and one in all and all are becomings of thy being, all are pervading or
pre-eminent or disguised powers of thy nature, tell me of it, he cries, in its
detail and extent, and tell me ever more of it; it is nectar of immortality to me,
and however much of it I hear, I am not satiated. Here we get an indication
in the Gita of something which the Gita itself does not bring out expressly, but
which occurs frequently in the Upanishads and was developed later on by
Vaishnavism and Shaktism in a greater intensity of vision, man's possible joy
of the Divine in the world-existence, the universal Ananda, the play of the
Mother, the sweetness and beauty of God's Lila.
\note{X. 16-18.}
\par The divine Teacher accedes to the request of the disciple, but with an
initial reminder that a full reply is not possible. For God is infinite and his
manifestation is infinite. The forms of his manifestation too are innumerable.
Each form is a symbol of some divine power, \s{vibh\=uti}, concealed in it and
to the seeing eye each finite carries in it its own revelation of the infinite.
Yes, he says, I will tell thee of my divine Vibhutis, but only in some of my
principal pre-eminences and as an indication and by the example of things in
which thou canst most readily see the power of the Godhead,
\s{pr\=adh\=anyata\,h}, \s{udde\'sata\,h}. For there is no end to the innumerable
detail of the Godhead's self-extension in the universe, \s{n\=asti anto vistarasya
me}. This reminder begins the passage and is repeated at the end in order to
give it a greater and unmistakable emphasis. And then throughout the rest of
the chapter
\note{X. 19-42.} we get a summary description of these principal indications,
these pre-eminent signs of the divine force present in the things and persons
of the universe. It seems at first as
Page 360

if they were given pell-mell, without any order, but still there is a certain
principle in the enumeration, which, if it is once disengaged, can lead by a
helpful guidance to the inner sense of the idea and its consequences. The
chapter has been called the Vibhuti-Yoga,—an indispensable yoga. For while
we must identify ourselves impartially with the universal divine Becoming in
all its extension, its good and evil, perfection and imperfection, light and
darkness, we must at the same time realise that there is an ascending
evolutionary power in it, an increasing intensity of its revelation in things, a
hierarchic secret something that carries us upward from the first concealing
appearances through higher and higher forms towards the large ideal nature
of the universal Godhead.
\par This summary enumeration begins with a statement of the primal
principle that underlies all the power of this manifestation in the universe. It is
this that in every being and object God dwells concealed and discoverable; he
is housed as in a crypt in the mind and heart of every thing and creature, an
inner self in the core of its subjective and its objective becoming, one who is
the beginning and middle and end of all that is, has been or will be. For it is
this inner divine Self hidden from the mind and heart which he inhabits, this
luminous Inhabitant concealed from the view of the soul in Nature which he
has put forth into Nature as his representative, who is all the time evolving
the mutations of our personality in Time and our sensational existence in
Space,—Time and Space that are the conceptual movement and extension of
the Godhead in us. All is this self-seeing Soul, this self-representing Spirit. For
ever from within all beings, from within all conscient and inconscient
existences, this All-conscient develops his manifested self in quality and
power, develops it in the forms of objects, in the instruments of our
subjectivity, in knowledge and word and thinking, in the creations of the mind
and in the passion and actions of the doer, in the measures of Time, in cosmic
powers and godheads and in the forces of Nature, in plant life, in animal life,
in human and superhuman beings.
\par If we look at things with this eye of vision unblinded by
Page 361

differentiations of quality and quantity or by difference of values and
oppositions of nature, we shall see that all things are in fact and can be
nothing but powers of his manifestation, vibhutis of this universal Soul and
Spirit, Yoga of this great Yogin, self-creations of this marvellous self-Creator.
He is the unborn and the all-pervading Master of his own innumerable
becomings in the universe, \s{ajo vibhu\,h}; all things are his powers and
effectuations in his self-Nature, vibhutis. He is the origin of all they are, their
beginning; he is their support in their ever-changing status, their middle; he is
their end too, the culmination or the disintegration of each created thing in its
cessation or its disappearance. He brings them out from his consciousness
and is hidden in them, he withdraws them into his consciousness and they are
hidden in him for a time or for ever. What is apparent to us is only a power of
becoming of the One: what disappears from our sense and vision is effect of
that power of becoming of the One. All classes, genera, species, individuals
are such vibhutis. But since it is through power in his becoming that he is
apparent to us, he is especially apparent in whatever is of a pre-eminent
value or seems to act with a powerful and pre-eminent force. And therefore
in each kind of being we can see him most in those in whom the power of
nature of that kind reaches its highest, its leading, its most effectively
self-revealing manifestation. These are in a special sense Vibhutis. Yet the
highest power and manifestation is only a very partial revelation of the
Infinite; even the whole universe is informed by only one degree of his
greatness, illumined by one ray of his splendour, glorious with a faint hint of
his delight and beauty. This is in sum the gist of the enumeration, the result
we carry away from it, the heart of its meaning.
\par God is imperishable, beginningless, unending Time; this is his most
evident Power of becoming and the essence of the whole universal
movement. \s{Aham eva ak\,saya\,h k\=ala\,h}. In that movement of Time and
Becoming God appears to our conception or experience of him by the
evidence of his works as the divine Power who ordains and sets all things in
their place in the movement. In his form of Space it is he who fronts us
Page 362

in every direction, million-bodied, myriad-minded, manifest in each existence;
we see his faces on all sides of us. \s{Dh\=at\=a 'ha\.m} \s{vi\'svato-mukha\,h}. For
simultaneously in all these many million persons and things,
\s{sarva-bh\=ute\,su}, there works the mystery of his self and thought and force
and his divine genius of creation and his marvellous art of formation and his
impeccable ordering of relations and possibilities and inevitable
consequences. He appears to us too in the universe as the universal spirit of
Destruction, who seems to create only to undo his creations in the end,—“I
am all-snatching Death,” \s{aha\.m m\,rtyu\,h sarva-hara\,h}. And yet his Power
of becoming does not cease from its workings, for the force of rebirth and
new creation ever keeps pace with the force of death and destruction,—“and
I am too the birth of all that shall come into being.” The divine Self in things is
the sustaining Spirit of the present, the withdrawing Spirit of the past, the
creative Spirit of the future.
\par Then among all these living beings, cosmic godheads, superhuman and
human and subhuman creatures, and amid all these qualities, powers and
objects, the chief, the head, the greatest in quality of each class is a special
power of the becoming of the Godhead. I am, says the Godhead, Vishnu
among the Adityas, Shiva among the Rudras, Indra among the gods, Prahlada
among the Titans, Brihaspati the chief of the high priests of the world,
Skanda the war-god, leader of the leaders of battle, Marichi among the
Maruts, the lord of wealth among the Yakshas and Rakshasas, the serpent
Ananta among the Nagas, Agni among the Vasus, Chitraratha among the
Gandharvas, Kandarpa the love-God among the progenitors, Varuna among
the peoples of the sea, Aryaman among the Fathers, Narada among the
divine sages, Yama lord of the Law among those who maintain rule and law,
among the powers of storm the Wind-God. At the other end of the scale I am
the radiant sun among lights and splendours, the moon among the stars of
night, the ocean among the flowing waters, Meru among the peaks of the
world, Himalaya among the mountain-ranges, Ganges among the rivers, the
divine thunderbolt among weapons. Among all plants and trees I am the
Aswattha, among horses Indra's horse Uchchaihsravas, Airavata
Page 363

among the elephants, among the birds Garuda, Vasuki the snake-god among
the serpents, Kamadhuk the cow of plenty among cattle, the alligator among
fishes, the lion among the beasts of the forest. I am Margasirsha, first of the
months; I am spring, the fairest of the seasons.
\par In living beings, the Godhead tells Arjuna, I am consciousness by which
they are aware of themselves and their surroundings. I am mind among the
senses, mind by which they receive the impressions of objects and react upon
them. I am man's qualities of mind and character and body and action; I am
glory and speech and memory and intelligence and steadfastness and
forgiveness, the energy of the energetic and the strength of the mighty. I am
resolution and perseverance and victory, I am the sattwic quality of the good,
I am the gambling of the cunning; I am the mastery and power of all who rule
and tame and vanquish and the policy of all who succeed and conquer; I am
the silence of things secret, the knowledge of the knower, the logic of those
who debate. I am the letter A among letters, the dual among compounds, the
sacred syllable OM among words, the Gayatri among metres, the Sama-veda
among the Vedas and the great Sama among the mantras. I am Time the
head of all reckoning to those who reckon and measure. I am spiritual
knowledge among the many philosophies, arts and sciences. I am all the
powers of the human being and all the energies of the universe and its
creatures.
\par Those in whom my powers rise to the utmost heights of human
attainment are myself always, my special Vibhutis. I am among men the king
of men, the leader, the mighty man, the hero. I am Rama among warriors,
Krishna among the Vrishnis, Arjuna among the Pandavas. The illumined
Rishi is my Vibhuti; I am Bhrigu among the great Rishis. The great seer, the
inspired poet who sees and reveals the truth by the light of the idea and sound
of the word, is myself luminous in the mortal; I am Ushanas among the
seer-poets. The great sage, thinker, philosopher is my power among men, my
own vast intelligence; I am Vyasa among the sages. But, with whatever
variety of degree in manifestation, all beings are in their own way and nature
Page 364

powers of the Godhead; nothing moving or unmoving, animate or inanimate in
the world can be without me. I am the divine seed of all existences and of
that seed they are the branches and flowers; what is in the seed of self, that
only they can develop in Nature. There is no numbering or limit to my divine
Vibhutis; what I have spoken is nothing more than a summary development
and I have given only the light of a few leading indications and a strong
opening to endless verities. Whatever beautiful and glorious creature thou
seest in the world, whatever being is mighty and forceful among men and
above man and below him, know to be a very splendour, light and energy of
Me and born of a potent portion and intense power of my existence. But
what need is there of a multitude of details for this knowledge? Take it thus,
that I am here in this world and everywhere, I am in all and I constitute all:
there is nothing else than I, nothing without Me. I support this entire universe
with a single degree of my illimitable power and an infinitesimal portion of my
fathomless spirit; all these worlds are only sparks, hints, glintings of the I Am
eternal and immeasurable. \LNOTES
Page 365

\par
\HN IX
\par
\ht The Theory of the Vibhuti
\par\drop The importance of this chapter of the Gita is very much greater
than appears at first view or to an eye of prepossession which is looking into
the text only for the creed of the last transcendence and the detached turning
of the human soul away from the world to a distant Absolute. The message
of the Gita is the gospel of the Divinity in man who by force of an increasing
union unfolds himself out of the veil of the lower Nature, reveals to the
human soul his cosmic spirit, reveals his absolute transcendences, reveals
himself in man and in all beings. The potential outcome here of this union, this
divine Yoga, man growing towards the Godhead, the Godhead manifest in the
human soul and to the inner human vision, is our liberation from limited ego
and our elevation to the higher nature of a divine humanity. For dwelling in
this greater spiritual nature and not in the mortal weft, the tangled complexity
of the three gunas, man, one with God by knowledge, love and will and the
giving up of his whole being into the Godhead, is able indeed to rise to the
absolute Transcendence, but also to act upon the world, no longer in
ignorance, but in the right relation of the individual to the Supreme, in the truth
of the Spirit, fulfilled in immortality, for God in the world and no longer for the
ego. To call Arjuna to this action, to make him aware of the being and power
that he is and of the Being and Power whose will acts through him, is the
purpose of the embodied Godhead. To this end the divine Krishna is his
charioteer; to this end there came upon him that great discouragement and
deep dissatisfaction with the lesser human motives of his work; to substitute
for them the larger spiritual motive this revelation is given to him in the
supreme moment of the work to which he has been appointed. The vision of
the World-Purusha and the divine command to action is the culminating point
to which he was being led. That
Page 366

is already imminent; but without the knowledge now given to him through the
Vibhuti-Yoga it would not bring with it its full meaning.
\par The mystery of the world-existence is in part revealed by the Gita. In
part, for who shall exhaust its infinite depths or what creed or philosophy say
that it has enlightened in a narrow space or shut up in a brief system all the
significance of the cosmic miracle? But so far as is essential for the Gita's
purpose, it is revealed to us. We have the way of the origination of the world
from God, the immanence of the Divine in it and its immanence in the Divine,
the essential unity of all existence, the relation of the human soul obscured in
Nature to the Godhead, its awakening to self-knowledge, its birth into a
greater consciousness, its ascension into its own spiritual heights. But when
this new self-vision and consciousness have been acquired in place of the
original ignorance, what will be the liberated man's view of the world around
him, his attitude towards the cosmic manifestation of which he has now the
central secret? He will have first the knowledge of the unity of existence and
the regarding eye of that knowledge. He will see all around him as souls and
forms and powers of the one divine Being. Henceforward that vision will be
the starting-point of all the inward and outward operations of his
consciousness; it will be the fundamental seeing, the spiritual basis of all his
actions. He will see all things and every creature living, moving and acting in
the One, contained in the divine and eternal Existence. But he will also see
that One as the Inhabitant in all, their Self, the essential Spirit within them
without whose secret presence in their conscious nature they could not at all
live, move or act and without whose will, power, sanction or sufferance not
one of their movements at any moment would be in the least degree possible.
Themselves too, their soul, mind, life and physical mould he will see only as a
result of the power, will and force of this one Self and Spirit. All will be to
him a becoming of this one universal Being. Their consciousness he will see
to be derived entirely from its consciousness, their power and will to be
drawn from and dependent on its power and will, their partial phenomenon of
nature to be a resultant from its greater
Page 367

divine Nature, whether in the immediate actuality of things it strikes the mind
as a manifestation or a disguise, a figure or a disfigurement of the Godhead.
No untoward or bewildering appearance of things will in any smallest degree
diminish or conflict with the completeness of this vision. It is the essential
foundation of the greater consciousness into which he has arisen, it is the
indispensable light that has opened around him and the one perfect way of
seeing, the one Truth that makes all others possible.
\par But the world is only a partial manifestation of the Godhead, it is not
itself that Divinity. The Godhead is infinitely greater than any natural
manifestation can be. By his very infinity, by its absolute freedom he exists
beyond all possibility of integral formulation in any scheme of worlds or
extension of cosmic Nature, however wide, complex, endlessly varied this
and every world may seem to us,—\s{n\=asti anto vistarasya me},—however
to our finite view infinite. Therefore beyond cosmos the eye of the liberated
spirit will see the utter Divine. Cosmos he will see as a figure drawn from the
Divinity who is beyond all figure, a constant minor term in the absolute
existence. Every relative and finite he will see as a figure of the divine
Absolute and Infinite, and both beyond all finites and through each finite he
will arrive at that alone, see always that beyond each phenomenon and
natural creature and relative action and every quality and every happening;
looking at each of these things and beyond it, he will find in the Divinity its
spiritual significance.
\par These things will not be to his mind intellectual concepts or this attitude
to the world simply a way of thinking or a pragmatic dogma. For if his
knowledge is conceptual only, it is a philosophy, an intellectual construction,
not a spiritual knowledge and vision, not a spiritual state of consciousness.
The spiritual seeing of God and world is not ideative only, not even mainly or
primarily ideative. It is direct experience and as real, vivid, near, constant,
effective, intimate as to the mind its sensuous seeing and feeling of images,
objects and persons. It is only the physical mind that thinks of God and spirit
as an abstract conception which it cannot visualise or represent
Page 368

to itself except by words and names and symbolic images and fictions. Spirit
sees spirit, the divinised consciousness sees God as directly and more
directly, as intimately and more intimately than bodily consciousness sees
matter. It sees, feels, thinks, senses the Divine. For to the spiritual
consciousness all manifest existence appears as a world of spirit and not a
world of matter, not a world of life, not a world even of mind; these other
things are to its view only God-thought, God-force, God-form. That is what
the Gita means by living and acting in Vasudeva, \s{mayi vartate}. The
spiritual consciousness is aware of the Godhead with that close knowledge by
identity which is so much more tremendously real than any mental perception
of the thinkable or any sensuous experience of the sensible. It is so aware
even of the Absolute who is behind and beyond all world-existence and who
originates and surpasses it and is for ever outside its vicissitudes. And of the
immutable self of this Godhead that pervades and supports the world's
mutations with his unchanging eternity, this consciousness is similarly aware,
by identity, by the oneness of this self with our own timeless unchanging
immortal spirit. It is aware again in the same manner of the divine Person
who knows himself in all these things and persons and becomes all things and
persons in his consciousness and shapes their thoughts and forms and
governs their actions by his immanent will. It is intimately conscious of God
absolute, God as self, God as spirit, soul and nature. Even this external
Nature it knows by identity and self-experience, but an identity freely
admitting variation, admitting relations, admitting greater and lesser degrees
of the action of the one power of existence. For Nature is God's power of
various self-becoming, \s{\=atma-vibh\=uti}.
\par But this spiritual consciousness of world-existence will not see Nature in
the world as the normal mind of man sees it in the ignorance or only as it is in
the effects of the ignorance. All in this Nature that is of the ignorance, all that
is imperfect or painful or perverse and repellent, does not exist as an absolute
opposite of the nature of the Godhead, but goes back to something behind
itself, goes back to a saving power of spirit in which it can find its own true
being and redemption. There is an
Page 369

original and originating Supreme Prakriti, in which the divine power and will
to be enjoys its own absolute quality and pure revelation. There is found the
highest, there the perfect energy of all the energies we see in the universe.
That is what presents itself to us as the ideal nature of the Godhead, a nature
of absolute knowledge, absolute power and will, absolute love and delight.
And all the infinite variations of its quality and energy, \s{ananta-gu\,na},
\s{aga\,nana-\'sakti}, are there wonderfully various, admirably and
spontaneously harmonised free self-formulations of this absolute wisdom and
will and power and delight and love. All is there a many-sided untrammelled
unity of infinites. Each energy, each quality is in the ideal divine nature pure,
perfect, self-possessed, harmonious in its action; nothing there strives for its
own separate limited self-fulfilment, all act in an inexpressible oneness. There
all dharmas, all laws of being—dharma, law of being, is only characteristic
action of divine energy and quality, \s{gu\,na-karma},—are one free and
plastic dharma. The one divine Power of being
\note{\s{tapas}, \s{cit-\'sakti}.} works with an immeasurable liberty and, tied
to no single excluding law, not limited by any binding system, rejoices in her
own play of infinity and never falters in her truth of self-expression perfect
for ever.
\par But in the universe in which we live, there is a separating principle of
selection and differentiation. There we see each energy, each quality which
comes out for expression labouring as if for its own hand, trying to get as
much self-expression as it can in whatever way it can, and accommodating
somehow as best or as worst it may that effort with the concomitant or rival
effort of other energies and qualities for their separate self-expression. The
Spirit, the Divine dwells in this struggling world-nature and imposes on it a
certain harmony by the inalienable law of the inner secret oneness on which
the action of all these powers is based. But it is a relative harmony which
seems to result from an original division, to emerge from and subsist by the
shock of divisions and not from an original oneness. Or at least the oneness
seems to be suppressed and latent, not to
Page 370

find itself, never to put off its baffling disguises. And in fact it does not find
itself till the individual being in this world-nature discovers in himself the
higher divine Prakriti from whom this lesser movement is a derivation.
Nevertheless, the qualities and energies at work in the world, operating
variously in man, animal, plant, inanimate thing, are, whatever forms they may
take, always divine qualities and energies. All energies and qualities are
powers of the Godhead. Each comes from the divine Prakriti there, works for
its self-expression in the lower Prakriti here, increases its potency of
affirmation and actualised values under these hampering conditions, and as it
reaches its heights of self-power, comes near to the visible expression of the
Divinity and directs itself upward to its own absolute in the supreme, the
ideal, the divine Nature. For each energy is being and power of the Godhead
and the expansion and self-expression of energy is always the expansion and
expression of the Godhead.
\par One might even say that at a certain point of intensity each force in us,
force of knowledge, force of will, force of love, force of delight, can result in
an explosion which breaks the shell of the lower formulation and liberates the
energy from its separative action into union with the infinite freedom and
power of the divine Being. A highest Godward tension liberates the mind
through an absolute seeing of knowledge, liberates the heart through an
absolute love and delight, liberates the whole existence through an absolute
concentration of will towards a greater existence. But the percussion and the
delivering shock come by the touch of the Divine on our actual nature which
directs the energy away from its normal limited separative action and objects
towards the Eternal, Universal and Transcendent, orientates it towards the
infinite and absolute Godhead. This truth of the dynamic omnipresence of the
divine Power of being is the foundation of the theory of the Vibhuti.
\par The infinite divine Shakti is present everywhere and secretly supports
the lower formulation, \s{par\=a prak\,rtir me yay\=a dh\=aryate jagat}, but it holds
itself back, hidden in the heart of each natural existence, \s{sarvabh\=ut\=an\=a\.m
h\,rdde\'se}, until the veil of Yogamaya is rent by the light of knowledge. The
spiritual being of man, the
Page 371

Jiva, possesses the divine Nature. He is a manifestation of God in that
Nature, \s{par\=a prak\,rtir j\=iva-bh\=ut\=a}, and he has latent in him all the divine
energies and qualities, the light, the force, the power of being of the Godhead.
But in this inferior Prakriti in which we live, the Jiva follows the principle of
selection and finite determination, and there whatever nexus of energy,
whatever quality or spiritual principle he brings into birth with him or brings
forward as the seed of his self-expression, becomes an operative portion of
his swabhava, his law of self-becoming, and determines his swadharma, his
law of action. And if that were all, there would be no perplexity or difficulty;
the life of man would be a luminous unfolding of godhead. But this lower
energy of our world is a nature of ignorance, of egoism, of the three gunas.
Because this is a nature of egoism, the Jiva conceives of himself as the
separative ego: he works out his self-expression egoistically as a separative
will to be in conflict as well as in association with the same will to be in
others. He attempts to possess the world by strife and not by unity and
harmony; he stresses an ego-centric discord. Because this is a nature of
ignorance, a blind seeing and an imperfect or partial self-expression, he does
not know himself, does not know his law of being, but follows it instinctively
under the ill-understood compulsion of the world-energy, with a struggle, with
much inner conflict, with a very large possibility of deviation. Because this is
a nature of the three gunas, this confused and striving self-expression takes
various forms of incapacity, perversion or partial self-finding. Dominated by
the guna of tamas, the mode of darkness and inertia, the power of being
works in a weak confusion, a prevailing incapacity, an unaspiring subjection
to the blind mechanism of the forces of the Ignorance. Dominated by the
guna of rajas, the mode of action, desire and possession, there is a struggle,
there is an effort, there is a growth of power and capacity, but it is stumbling,
painful, vehement, misled by wrong notions, methods and ideals, impelled to a
misuse, corruption and perversion of right notions, methods or ideals and
prone, especially, to a great, often an enormous exaggeration of the ego.
Dominated by the guna of sattwa, the mode of light
Page 372

and poise and peace, there is a more harmonious action, a right dealing with
the nature, but right only within the limits of an individual light and a capacity
unable to exceed the better forms of this lower mental will and knowledge.
To escape from this tangle, to rise beyond the ignorance, the ego and the
gunas is the first real step towards divine perfection. By that transcendence
the Jiva finds his own divine nature and his true existence.
\par The liberated eye of knowledge in the spiritual consciousness does not in
its outlook on the world see this struggling lower Nature alone. If we
perceive only the apparent outward fact of our nature and others' nature, we
are looking with the eye of the ignorance and cannot know God equally in all,
in the sattwic, the rajasic, the tamasic creature, in God and Titan, in saint and
sinner, in the wise man and the ignorant, in the great and in the little, in man,
animal, plant and inanimate existence. The liberated vision sees three things
at once as the whole occult truth of the natural being. First and foremost it
sees the divine Prakriti in all, secret, present, waiting for evolution; it sees her
as the real power in all things, that which gives its value to all this apparent
action of diverse quality and force, and it reads the significance of these latter
phenomena not in their own language of ego and ignorance, but in the light of
the divine Nature. Therefore it sees too, secondly, the differences of the
apparent action in Deva and Rakshasa, man and beast and bird and reptile,
good and wicked, ignorant and learned, but as action of divine quality and
energy under these conditions, under these masks. It is not deluded by the
mask, but detects behind every mask the Godhead. It observes the perversion
or the imperfection, but it pierces to the truth of the spirit behind, it discovers
it even in the perversion and imperfection self-blinded, struggling to find itself,
groping through various forms of self-expression and experience towards
complete self-knowledge, towards its own infinite and absolute. The liberated
eye does not lay undue stress on the perversion and imperfection, but is able
to see all with a complete love and charity in the heart, a complete
understanding in the intelligence, a complete equality in the spirit. Finally, it
sees the upward urge of the striving powers of the Will to be
Page 373

towards Godhead; it respects, welcomes, encourages all high manifestations
of energy and quality, the flaming tongues of the Divinity, the mounting
greatnesses of soul and mind and life in their intensities uplifted from the
levels of the lower nature towards heights of luminous wisdom and
knowledge, mighty power, strength, capacity, courage, heroism, benignant
sweetness and ardour and grandeur of love and self-giving, pre-eminent
virtue, noble action, captivating beauty and harmony, fine and godlike
creation. The eye of the spirit sees and marks out the rising godhead of man
in the great Vibhuti.
\par This is a recognition of the Godhead as Power, but power in its widest
sense, power not only of might, but of knowledge, will, love, work, purity,
sweetness, beauty. The Divine is being, consciousness and delight, and in the
world all throws itself out and finds itself again by energy of being, energy of
consciousness and energy of delight; this is a world of the works of the divine
Shakti. That Shakti shapes herself here in innumerable kinds of beings and
each of them has its own characteristic powers of her force. Each power is
the Divine himself in that form, in the lion as in the hind, in the Titan as in the
God, in the inconscient sun that flames through ether as in man who thinks
upon earth. The deformation given by the gunas is the minor, not really the
major aspect; the essential thing is the divine power that is finding
self-expression. It is the Godhead who manifests himself in the great thinker,
the hero, the leader of men, the great teacher, sage, prophet, religious
founder, saint, lover of man, the great poet, the great artist, the great scientist,
the ascetic self-tamer, the tamer of things and events and forces. The work
itself, the high poem, the perfect form of beauty, the deep love, the noble act,
the divine achievement is a movement of godhead; it is the Divine in
manifestation.
\par This is a truth which all ancient cultures recognised and respected, but
one side of the modern mind has singular repugnances to the idea, sees in it a
worship of mere strength and power, an ignorant or self-degrading
hero-worship or a doctrine of the Asuric superman. Certainly, there is an
ignorant way of taking this truth, as there is an ignorant way of taking all
Page 374

truths; but it has its proper place, its indispensable function in the divine
economy of Nature. The Gita puts it in that right place and perspective. It
must be based on the recognition of the divine self in all men and all
creatures; it must be consistent with an equal heart to the great and the small,
the eminent and the obscure manifestation. God must be seen and loved in
the ignorant, the humble, the weak, the vile, the outcaste. In the Vibhuti
himself it is not, except as a symbol, the outward individual that is to be thus
recognised and set high, but the one Godhead who displays himself in the
power. But this does not abrogate the fact that there is an ascending scale in
manifestation and that Nature mounts upward in her degrees of
self-expression from her groping, dark or suppressed symbols to the first
visible expressions of the Godhead. Each great being, each great
achievement is a sign of her power of self-exceeding and a promise of the
final, the supreme exceeding. Man himself is a superior degree of natural
manifestation to the beast and reptile, though in both there is the one equal
Brahman. But man has not reached his own highest heights of self-exceeding
and meanwhile every hint of a greater power of the Will to be in him must be
recognised as a promise and an indication. Respect for the divinity in man, in
all men, is not diminished, but heightened and given a richer significance by
lifting our eyes to the trail of the great Pioneers who lead or point him by
whatever step of attainment towards supermanhood.
\par Arjuna himself is a Vibhuti; he is a man high in the spiritual evolution, a
figure marked out in the crowd of his contemporaries, a chosen instrument of
the divine Narayana, the Godhead in humanity. In one place the Teacher
speaking as the supreme and equal Self of all declares that there is none dear
to him, none hated, but in others he says that Arjuna is dear to him and his
bhakta and therefore guided and safe in his hands, chosen for the vision and
the knowledge. There is here only an apparent inconsistency. The Power as
the self of the cosmos is equal to all, therefore to each being he gives
according to the workings of his nature; but there is also a personal relation
of the Purushottama to the human being in which he is especially near to the
man
Page 375

who has come near to him. All these heroes and men of might who have
joined in battle on the plain of Kurukshetra are vessels of the divine Will and
through each he works according to his nature but behind the veil of his ego.
Arjuna has reached that point when the veil can be rent and the embodied
Godhead can reveal the mystery of his workings to his Vibhuti. It is even
essential that there should be the revelation. He is the instrument of a great
work, a work terrible in appearance but necessary for a long step forward in
the march of the race, a decisive movement in its struggle towards the
kingdom of the Right and the Truth, \s{dharmar\=ajya}. The history of the
cycles of man is a progress towards the unveiling of the Godhead in the soul
and life of humanity; each high event and stage of it is a divine manifestation.
Arjuna, the chief instrument of the hidden Will, the great protagonist, must
become the divine man capable of doing the work consciously as the action
of the Divine. So only can that action become psychically alive and receive
its spiritual import and its light and power of secret significance. He is called
to self-knowledge; he must see God as the Master of the universe and the
origin of the world's creatures and happenings, all as the Godhead's
self-expression in Nature, God in all, God in himself as man and as Vibhuti,
God in the lownesses of being and on its heights, God on the topmost
summits, man too upon heights as the Vibhuti and climbing to the last summits
in the supreme liberation and union. Time in its creation and destruction must
be seen by him as the figure of the Godhead in its steps,—steps that
accomplish the cycles of the cosmos on whose spires of movement the divine
spirit in the human body rises doing God's work in the world as his Vibhuti to
the supreme transcendences. This knowledge has been given; the
Time-figure of the Godhead is now to be revealed and from the million
mouths of that figure will issue the command for the appointed action to the
liberated Vibhuti.
Page 376

\par
\HN X
\par
\ht The Vision of the World-Spirit\nl Time the Destroyer
\par\drop The vision of the universal Purusha is one of the best known and
most powerfully poetic passages in the Gita, but its place in the thought is not
altogether on the surface. It is evidently intended for a poetic and revelatory
symbol and we must see how it is brought in and for what purpose and
discover to what it points in its significant aspects before we can capture its
meaning. It is invited by Arjuna in his desire to see the living image, the
visible greatness of the unseen Divine, the very embodiment of the Spirit and
Power that governs the universe. He has heard the highest spiritual secret of
existence, that all is from God and all is the Divine and in all things God
dwells and is concealed and can be revealed in every finite appearance. The
illusion which so persistently holds man's sense and mind, the idea that things
at all exist in themselves or for themselves apart from God or that anything
subject to Nature can be self-moved and self-guided, has passed from
him,—that was the cause of his doubt and bewilderment and refusal of
action. Now he knows what is the sense of the birth and passing away of
existences. He knows that the imperishable greatness of the divine conscious
Soul is the secret of all these appearances. All is a Yoga of this great eternal
Spirit in things and all happenings are the result and expression of that Yoga;
all Nature is full of the secret Godhead and in labour to reveal him in her. But
he would see too the very form and body of this Godhead, if that be possible.
He has heard of his attributes and understood the steps and ways of his
self-revelation; but now he asks of this Master of the Yoga to discover his
very imperishable Self to the eye of Yoga. Not, evidently, the formless
silence of his actionless immutability, but the Supreme from whom is all
energy and action, of whom forms
Page 377

are the masks, who reveals his force in the Vibhuti,—the Master of works,
the Master of knowledge and adoration, the Lord of Nature and all her
creatures. For this greatest all-comprehending vision he is made to ask
because it is so, from the Spirit revealed in the universe, that he must receive
the command to his part in the world-action.
\par What thou hast to see, replies the Avatar, the human eye cannot
grasp,—for the human eye can see only the outward appearances of things
or make out of them separate symbol forms, each of them significant of only
a few aspects of the eternal Mystery. But there is a divine eye, an inmost
seeing, by which the supreme Godhead in his Yoga can be beheld and that
eye I now give to thee. Thou shalt see, he says, my hundreds and thousands
of divine forms, various in kind, various in shape and hue; thou shalt see the
Adityas and the Rudras and the Maruts and the Aswins; thou shalt see many
wonders that none has beheld; thou shalt see today the whole world related
and unified in my body and whatever else thou willest to behold. This then is
the keynote, the central significance. It is the vision of the One in the many,
the Many in the One,—and all are the One. It is this vision that to the eye of
the divine Yoga liberates, justifies, explains all that is and was and shall be.
Once seen and held, it lays the shining axe of God at the root of all doubts
and perplexities and annihilates all denials and oppositions. It is the vision that
reconciles and unifies. If the soul can arrive at unity with the Godhead in this
vision,—Arjuna has not yet done that, therefore we find that he has fear
when he sees,—all even that is terrible in the world loses its terror. We see
that it too is an aspect of the Godhead and once we have found his meaning
in it, not looking at it by itself alone, we can accept the whole of existence
with an all-embracing joy and a mighty courage, go forward with sure steps
to the appointed work and envisage beyond it the supreme consummation.
The soul admitted to the divine knowledge which beholds all things in one
view, not with a divided, partial and therefore bewildered seeing, can make a
new discovery of the world and all else that it wills to see, \s{yac c\=anyad}
\s{dra\,s\,tum icchasi}; it can move on the basis of this all-relating
Page 378

and all-unifying vision from revelation to completing revelation.
\par The supreme Form is then made visible. It is that of the infinite Godhead
whose faces are everywhere and in whom are all the wonders of existence,
who multiplies unendingly all the many marvellous revelations of his being, a
world-wide Divinity seeing with innumerable eyes, speaking from
innumerable mouths, armed for battle with numberless divine uplifted
weapons, glorious with divine ornaments of beauty, robed in heavenly raiment
of deity, lovely with garlands of divine flowers, fragrant with divine perfumes.
Such is the light of this body of God as if a thousand suns had risen at once in
heaven. The whole world multitudinously divided and yet unified is visible in
the body of the God of Gods. Arjuna sees him, God magnificent and beautiful
and terrible, the Lord of souls who has manifested in the glory and greatness
of his spirit this wild and monstrous and orderly and wonderful and sweet and
terrible world, and overcome with marvel and joy and fear he bows down and
adores with words of awe and with clasped hands the tremendous vision. “I
see” he cries “all the gods in thy body, O God, and different companies of
beings, Brahma the creating lord seated in the Lotus, and the Rishis and the
race of the divine Serpents. I see numberless arms and bellies and eyes and
faces, I see thy infinite forms on every side, but I see not thy end nor thy
middle nor thy beginning, O Lord of the universe, O Form universal. I see
thee crowned and with thy mace and thy discus, hard to discern because thou
art a luminous mass of energy on all sides of me, an encompassing blaze, a
sun-bright fire-bright Immeasurable. Thou art the supreme Immutable whom
we have to know, thou art the high foundation and abode of the universe,
thou art the imperishable guardian of the eternal laws, thou art the
sempiternal soul of existence.”
\par But in the greatness of this vision there is too the terrific image of the
Destroyer. This Immeasurable without end or middle or beginning is he in
whom all things begin and exist and end. This Godhead who embraces the
worlds with his numberless arms and destroys with his million hands, whose
eyes are suns
Page 379

and moons, has a face of blazing fire and is ever burning up the whole
universe with the flame of his energy. The form of him is fierce and
marvellous and alone it fills all the regions and occupies the whole space
between earth and heaven. The companies of the gods enter it, afraid,
adoring; the Rishis and the Siddhas crying “May there be peace and weal”
praise it with many praises; the eyes of Gods and Titans and Giants are fixed
on it in amazement. It has enormous burning eyes; it has mouths that gape to
devour, terrible with many tusks of destruction; it has faces like the fires of
Death and Time. The kings and the captains and the heroes on both sides of
the world-battle are hastening into its tusked and terrible jaws and some are
seen with crushed and bleeding heads caught between its teeth of power; the
nations are rushing to destruction with helpless speed into its mouths of flame
like many rivers hurrying in their course towards the ocean or like moths that
cast themselves on a kindled fire. With those burning mouths the Form of
Dread is licking all the regions around; the whole world is full of his burning
energies and baked in the fierceness of his lustres. The world and its nations
are shaken and in anguish with the terror of destruction and Arjuna shares in
the trouble and panic around him; troubled and in pain is the soul within him
and he finds no peace or gladness. He cries to the dreadful Godhead,
“Declare to me who thou art that wearest this form of fierceness. Salutation
to thee, O thou great Godhead, turn thy heart to grace. I would know who
thou art who wast from the beginning, for I know not the will of thy
workings.”
\par This last cry of Arjuna indicates the double intention in the vision. This is
the figure of the supreme and universal Being, the Ancient of Days who is
for ever, \s{san\=atana\.m puru\,sa\.m pur\=a\,nam}, this is he who for ever creates,
for Brahma the Creator is one of the Godheads seen in his body, he who
keeps the world always in existence, for he is the guardian of the eternal
laws, but who is always too destroying in order that he may new-create, who
is Time, who is Death, who is Rudra the Dancer of the calm and awful
dance, who is Kali with her garland of skulls trampling naked in battle and
flecked with the blood of the slaughtered
Page 380

Titans, who is the cyclone and the fire and the earthquake and pain and
famine and revolution and ruin and the swallowing ocean. And it is this last
aspect of him which he puts forward at the moment. It is an aspect from
which the mind in men willingly turns away and ostrich-like hides its head so
that perchance, not seeing, it may not be seen by the Terrible. The weakness
of the human heart wants only fair and comforting truths or in their absence
pleasant fables; it will not have the truth in its entirety because there there is
much that is not clear and pleasant and comfortable, but hard to understand
and harder to bear. The raw religionist, the superficial optimistic thinker, the
sentimental idealist, the man at the mercy of his sensations and emotions
agree in twisting away from the sterner conclusions, the harsher and fiercer
aspects of universal existence. Indian religion has been ignorantly reproached
for not sharing in this general game of hiding, because on the contrary it has
built and placed before it the terrible as well as the sweet and beautiful
symbols of the Godhead. But it is the depth and largeness of its long thought
and spiritual experience that prevent it from feeling or from giving
countenance to these feeble shrinkings.
\par Indian spirituality knows that God is Love and Peace and calm
Eternity,—the Gita which presents us with these terrible images, speaks of
the Godhead who embodies himself in them as the lover and friend of all
creatures. But there is too the sterner aspect of his divine government of the
world which meets us from the beginning, the aspect of destruction, and to
ignore it is to miss the full reality of the divine Love and Peace and Calm and
Eternity and even to throw on it an aspect of partiality and illusion, because
the comforting exclusive form in which it is put is not borne out by the nature
of the world in which we live. This world of our battle and labour is a fierce
dangerous destructive devouring world in which life exists precariously and
the soul and body of man move among enormous perils, a world in which by
every step forward, whether we will it or no, something is crushed and
broken, in which every breath of life is a breath too of death. To put away
the responsibility for all that seems to us evil or terrible on the shoulders of a
semi-omnipotent Devil,
Page 381

or to put it aside as part of Nature, making an unbridgeable opposition
between world-nature and God-Nature, as if Nature were independent of
God, or to throw the responsibility on man and his sins, as if he had a
preponderant voice in the making of this world or could create anything
against the will of God, are clumsily comfortable devices in which the
religious thought of India has never taken refuge. We have to look
courageously in the face of the reality and see that it is God and none else
who has made this world in his being and that so he has made it. We have to
see that Nature devouring her children, Time eating up the lives of creatures,
Death universal and ineluctable and the violence of the Rudra forces in man
and Nature are also the supreme Godhead in one of his cosmic figures. We
have to see that God the bountiful and prodigal creator, God the helpful,
strong and benignant preserver is also God the devourer and destroyer. The
torment of the couch of pain and evil on which we are racked is his touch as
much as happiness and sweetness and pleasure. It is only when we see with
the eye of the complete union and feel this truth in the depths of our being
that we can entirely discover behind that mask too the calm and beautiful
face of the all-blissful Godhead and in this touch that tests our imperfection
the touch of the friend and builder of the spirit in man. The discords of the
worlds are God's discords and it is only by accepting and proceeding through
them that we can arrive at the greater concords of his supreme harmony, the
summits and thrilled vastnesses of his transcendent and his cosmic Ananda.
\par The problem raised by the Gita and the solution it gives demand this
character of the vision of the World-Spirit. It is the problem of a great
struggle, ruin and massacre which has been brought about by the all-guiding
Will and in which the eternal Avatar himself has descended as the charioteer
of the protagonist in the battle. The seer of the vision is himself the
protagonist, the representative of the battling soul of man who has to strike
down tyrant and oppressive powers that stand in the path of his evolution and
to establish and enjoy the kingdom of a higher right and nobler law of being.
Perplexed by the terrible aspect of the catastrophe in which kindred smite at
kindred, whole nations
Page 382

are to perish and society itself seems doomed to sink down in a pit of
confusion and anarchy, he has shrunk back, refused the task of destiny and
demanded of his divine Friend and Guide why he is appointed to so dreadful a
work, \s{ki\.m karma\,ni ghore m\=a\.m niyojayasi}. He has been shown then how
individually to rise above the apparent character of whatever work he may
do, to see that Nature the executive force is the doer of the work, his natural
being the instrument, God the master of Nature and of works to whom he
must offer them without desire or egoistic choice as a sacrifice. He has been
shown too that the Divine who is above all these things and untouched by
them, yet manifests himself in man and Nature and their action and that all is
a movement in the cycles of this divine manifestation. But now when he is
put face to face with the embodiment of this truth, he sees in it magnified by
the image of the divine greatness this aspect of terror and destruction and is
appalled and can hardly bear it. For why should it be thus that the All-spirit
manifests himself in Nature? What is the significance of this creating and
devouring flame that is mortal existence, this world-wide struggle, these
constant disastrous revolutions, this labour and anguish and travail and
perishing of creatures? He puts the ancient question and breathes the eternal
prayer, “Declare to me who art thou that comest to us in this form of
fierceness. I would know who art thou who wast from the beginning, for I
know not the will of thy workings. Turn thy heart to grace.”
\par Destruction, replies the Godhead, is the will of my workings with which I
stand here on this field of Kurukshetra, the field of the working out of the
Dharma, the field of human action,—as we might symbolically translate the
descriptive phrase, \s{dharma-k\,setre kuru-k\,setre},—a world-wide
destruction which has come in the process of the Time-Spirit. I have a
foreseeing purpose which fulfils itself infallibly and no participation or
abstention of any human being can prevent, alter or modify it; all is done by
me already in my eternal eye of will before it can at all be done by man upon
earth. I as Time have to destroy the old structures and to build up a new,
mighty and splendid kingdom. Thou as a human instrument of the divine
Power and Wisdom hast in this
Page 383

struggle which thou canst not prevent to battle for the right and slay and
conquer its opponents. Thou too, the human soul in Nature, hast to enjoy in
Nature the fruit given by me, the empire of right and justice. Let this be
sufficient for thee,—to be one with God in thy soul, to receive his command,
to do his will, to see calmly a supreme purpose fulfilled in the world. “I am
Time the waster of the peoples arisen and increased whose will in my
workings is here to destroy the nations. Even without thee all these warriors
shall be not, who are ranked in the opposing armies. Therefore arise, get thee
glory, conquer thy enemies and enjoy an opulent kingdom. By me and none
other already even are they slain, do thou become the occasion only, O
Savyasachin. Slay, by me who are slain, Drona, Bhishma, Jayadratha, Karna
and other heroic fighters; be not pained and troubled. Fight, thou shalt
conquer the adversary in the battle.” The fruit of the great and terrible work
is promised and prophesied, not as a fruit hungered for by the individual,—for
to that there is to be no attachment,—but as the result of the divine will, the
glory and success of the thing to be done accomplished, the glory given by
the Divine to himself in his Vibhuti. Thus is the final and compelling command
to action given to the protagonist of the world-battle.
\par It is the Timeless manifest as Time and World-Spirit from whom the
command to action proceeds. For certainly the Godhead when he says, “I am
Time the Destroyer of beings,” does not mean either that he is the
Time-Spirit alone or that the whole essence of the Time-Spirit is destruction.
But it is this which is the present will of his workings, \s{prav\,rtti}.
Destruction is always a simultaneous or alternate element which keeps pace
with creation and it is by destroying and renewing that the Master of Life
does his long work of preservation. More, destruction is the first condition of
progress. Inwardly, the man who does not destroy his lower self-formations,
cannot rise to a greater existence. Outwardly also, the nation or community
or race which shrinks too long from destroying and replacing its past forms of
life, is itself destroyed, rots and perishes and out of its debris other nations,
communities and races are formed. By destruction
Page 384

of the old giant occupants man made himself a place upon earth. By
destruction of the Titans the gods maintain the continuity of the divine Law in
the cosmos. Whoever prematurely attempts to get rid of this law of battle and
destruction, strives vainly against the greater will of the World-Spirit.
Whoever turns from it in the weakness of his lower members, as did Arjuna
in the beginning,—therefore was his shrinking condemned as a small and
false pity, an inglorious, an un-Aryan and unheavenly feebleness of heart and
impotence of spirit, \s{klaibyam}, \s{k\,sudra\.m h\,rdaya-daurbalyam},—is
showing not true virtue, but a want of spiritual courage to face the sterner
truths of Nature and of action and existence. Man can only exceed the law
of battle by discovering the greater law of his immortality. There are those
who seek this where it always exists and must primarily be found, in the
higher reaches of the pure spirit, and to find it turn away from a world
governed by the law of Death. That is an individual solution which makes no
difference to mankind and the world, or rather makes only this difference that
they are deprived of so much spiritual power which might have helped them
forward in the painful march of their evolution.
\par What then is the master man, the divine worker, the opened channel of
the universal Will to do when he finds the World-Spirit turned towards some
immense catastrophe, figured before his eyes as Time the destroyer arisen
and increased for the destruction of the nations, and himself put there in the
forefront whether as a fighter with physical weapons or a leader and guide or
an inspirer of men, as he cannot fail to be by the very force of his nature and
the power within him, \s{svabh\=avajena svena karma\,n\=a}? To abstain, to sit
silent, to protest by non-intervention? But abstention will not help, will not
prevent the fulfilment of the destroying Will, but rather by the lacuna it
creates increase confusion. Even without thee, cries the Godhead, my will of
destruction would still be accomplished, \s{\,rte'pi tv\=am}. If Arjuna were to
abstain or even if the battle of Kurukshetra were not to be fought, that
evasion would only prolong and make worse the inevitable confusion,
disorder, ruin that are coming. For these things are no accident, but an
inevitable seed that
Page 385

has been sown and a harvest that must be reaped. They who have sown the
wind, must reap the whirlwind. Nor indeed will his own nature allow him any
real abstention, \s{prak\,rtis tv\=a\.m niyok\,syati}. This the Teacher tells Arjuna at
the close, “That which in thy egoism thou thinkest saying, I will not fight, vain
is this thy resolve: Nature shall yoke thee to thy work. Bound by thy own
action which is born of the law of thy being, what from delusion thou desirest
not to do, that thou shalt do even perforce.” Then to give another turn, to use
some kind of soul force, spiritual method and power, not physical weapons?
But that is only another form of the same action; the destruction will still take
place, and the turn given too will be not what the individual ego, but what the
World-Spirit wills. Even, the force of destruction may feed on this new
power, may get a more formidable impetus and Kali arise filling the world
with a more terrible sound of her laughters. No real peace can be till the
heart of man deserves peace; the law of Vishnu cannot prevail till the debt to
Rudra is paid. To turn aside then and preach to a still unevolved mankind the
law of love and oneness? Teachers of the law of love and oneness there
must be, for by that way must come the ultimate salvation. But not till the
Time-Spirit in man is ready, can the inner and ultimate prevail over the outer
and immediate reality. Christ and Buddha have come and gone, but it is
Rudra who still holds the world in the hollow of his hand. And meanwhile the
fierce forward labour of mankind tormented and oppressed by the Powers
that are profiteers of egoistic force and their servants cries for the sword of
the Hero of the struggle and the word of its prophet.
\par The highest way appointed for him is to carry out the will of God without
egoism, as the human occasion and instrument of that which he sees to be
decreed, with the constant supporting memory of the Godhead in himself and
man, \s{m\=am anusmaran}, and in whatever ways are appointed for him by
the Lord of his Nature. \s{Nimittam\=atra\.m bhava savyas\=acin}. He will not
cherish personal enmity, anger, hatred, egoistic desire and passion, will not
hasten towards strife or lust after violence and destruction like the fierce
Asura, but he will do his work, \s{lokasa\.ngrah\=aya}.
Page 386

Beyond the action he will look towards that to which it leads, that for which
he is warring. For God the Time-Spirit does not destroy for the sake of
destruction, but to make the ways clear in the cyclic process for a greater
rule and a progressing manifestation, \s{r\=ajya\.m sam\,rddham}. He will accept
in its deeper sense, which the superficial mind does not see, the greatness of
the struggle, the glory of the victory,—if need be, the glory of the victory
which comes masked as defeat,—and lead man too in the enjoyment of his
opulent kingdom. Not appalled by the face of the Destroyer, he will see
within it the eternal Spirit imperishable in all these perishing bodies and behind
it the face of the Charioteer, the Leader of man, the Friend of all creatures,
\s{suh\,rda\.m sarvabh\=ut\=an\=am}. This formidable World-Form once seen and
acknowledged, it is to that reassuring truth that the rest of the chapter is
directed; it discloses in the end a more intimate face and body of the Eternal.
Page 387

\par
\HN XI
\par
\ht The Vision of the World-Spirit
\note{Gita, XI. 35-55.}\nl The Double Aspect
\par\drop Even while the effects of the terrible aspect of this vision are still
upon him, the first words uttered by Arjuna after the Godhead has spoken are
eloquent of a greater uplifting and reassuring reality behind this face of death
and this destruction. “Rightly and in good place,” he cries, “O Krishna, does
the world rejoice and take pleasure in thy name, the Rakshasas are fleeing
from thee in terror to all the quarters and the companies of the Siddhas bow
down before thee in adoration. How should they not do thee homage, O great
Spirit? For thou art the original Creator and Doer of works and greater even
than creative Brahma. O thou Infinite, O thou Lord of the gods, O thou abode
of the universe, thou art the Immutable and thou art what is and is not and
thou art that which is the Supreme. Thou art the ancient Soul and the first
and original Godhead and the supreme resting-place of this All; thou art the
knower and that which is to be known and the highest status; O infinite in
form, by thee was extended the universe. Thou art Yama and Vayu and Agni
and Soma and Varuna and Prajapati, father of creatures, and the
great-grandsire. Salutation to thee a thousand times over and again and yet
again salutation, in front and behind and from every side, for thou art each
and all that is. Infinite in might and immeasurable in strength of action thou
pervadest all and art every one.”
\par But this supreme universal Being has lived here before him with the
human face, in the mortal body, the divine Man, the embodied Godhead, the
Avatar, and till now he has not known him. He has seen the humanity only
and has treated the Divine as
Page 388

a mere human creature. He has not pierced through the earthly mask to the
Godhead of which the humanity was a vessel and a symbol, and he prays
now for that Godhead's forgiveness of his unseeing carelessness and his
negligent ignorance. “For whatsoever I have spoken to thee in rash
vehemence, thinking of thee only as my human friend and companion, `O
Krishna, O Yadava, O comrade,' not knowing this thy greatness, in negligent
error or in love, and for whatsoever disrespect was shown by me to thee in
jest, on the couch and the seat and in the banquet, alone or in thy presence, I
pray forgiveness from thee the immeasurable. Thou art the father of all this
world of the moving and unmoving; thou art one to be worshipped and the
most solemn object of veneration. None is equal to thee, how then another
greater in all the three worlds, O incomparable in might? Therefore I bow
down before thee and prostrate my body and I demand grace of thee the
adorable Lord. As a father to his son, as a friend to his friend and comrade,
as one dear with him he loves, so shouldst thou, O Godhead, bear with me. I
have seen what never was seen before and I rejoice, but my mind is troubled
with fear. O Godhead, show me that other form of thine. I would see thee
even as before crowned and with thy mace and discus. Assume thy
four-armed shape, O thousand-armed, O Form universal.”
\par From the first words there comes the suggestion that the hidden truth
behind these terrifying forms is a reassuring, a heartening and delightful truth.
There is something that makes the heart of the world to rejoice and take
pleasure in the name and nearness of the Divine. It is the profound sense of
that which makes us see in the dark face of Kali the face of the Mother and
to perceive even in the midst of destruction the protecting arms of the Friend
of creatures, in the midst of evil the presence of a pure unalterable Benignity
and in the midst of death the Master of Immortality. From the terror of the
King of the divine action the Rakshasas, the fierce giant powers of darkness,
flee destroyed, defeated and overpowered. But the Siddhas, but the complete
and perfect who know and sing the names of the Immortal and live in the
truth of his being, bow down before every form of
Page 389

Him and know what every form enshrines and signifies. Nothing has real
need to fear except that which is to be destroyed, the evil, the ignorance, the
veilers in Night, the Rakshasa powers. All the movement and action of Rudra
the Terrible is towards perfection and divine light and completeness.
\par For this Spirit, this Divine is only in outward form the Destroyer, Time
who undoes all these finite forms: but in himself he is the Infinite, the Master
of the cosmic Godheads, in whom the world and all its action are securely
seated. He is the original and ever originating Creator, one greater than that
figure of creative Power called Brahma which he shows to us in the form of
things as one aspect of his trinity, creation chequered by a balance of
preservation and destruction. The real divine creation is eternal; it is the
Infinite manifested sempiternally in finite things, the Spirit who conceals and
reveals himself for ever in his innumerable infinity of souls and in the wonder
of their actions and in the beauty of their forms. He is the eternal Immutable;
he is the dual appearance of the Is and Is-not, of the manifest and the never
manifested, of things that were and seem to be no more, are and appear
doomed to perish, shall be and shall pass. But what he is beyond all these is
That, the Supreme, who holds all things mutable in the single eternity of a
Time to which all is ever present. He possesses his immutable self in a
timeless eternity of which Time and creation are an ever extending figure.
\par This is the Truth of him in which all is reconciled; a harmony of
simultaneous and interdependent truths start from and amount to the one that
is real. It is the truth of a supreme Soul of whose supreme nature the world is
a derivation and an inferior figure of that Infinite; of the Ancient of Days who
for ever presides over the long evolutions of Time; of the original Godhead of
whom Gods and men and all living creatures are the children, the powers, the
souls, spiritually justified in their being by his truth of existence; of the
Knower who develops in man the knowledge of himself and world and God;
of the one Object of all knowing who reveals himself to man's heart and mind
and soul, so that every new opening form of our knowledge is a partial
unfolding of him, up to the highest by which he is
Page 390

intimately, profoundly and integrally seen and discovered. This is the high
supreme Stability who originates and supports and receives to himself all that
are in the universe. By him in his own existence the world is extended, by his
omnipotent power, by his miraculous self-conception and energy and Ananda
of never-ending creation. All is an infinity of his material and spiritual forms.
He is all the many gods from the least to the greatest; he is the father of
creatures and all are his children and his people. He is the origin of Brahma,
the father to the first father of the divine creators of these different races of
living things. On this truth there is a constant insistence. Again it is repeated
that he is the All, he is each and every one, \s{sarva\,h}. He is the infinite
Universal and he is each individual and everything that is, the one Force and
Being in every one of us, the infinite Energy that throws itself out in these
multitudes, the immeasurable Will and mighty Power of motion and action
that forms out of itself all the courses of Time and all the happenings of the
spirit in Nature.
\par And from that insistence the thought naturally turns to the presence of
this one great Godhead in man. There the soul of the seer of the vision is
impressed by three successive suggestions. First, it is borne in upon him that
in the body of this son of Man who moved beside him as a transient creature
upon earth and sat by his side and lay with him on the same couch and ate
with him in the banquet and was the object of jest and careless word, actor in
war and council and common things, in this figure of mortal man was all the
time something great, concealed, of tremendous significance, a Godhead, an
Avatar, a universal Power, a One Reality, a supreme Transcendence. To this
occult divinity in which all the significance of man and his long race is
wrapped and from which all world-existence receives its inner meaning of
ineffable greatness, he had been blind. Now only he sees the universal Spirit
in the individual frame, the Divine embodied in humanity, the transcendent
Inhabitant of this symbol of Nature. He has seen now only this tremendous,
infinite, immeasurable Reality of all these apparent things, this boundless
universal Form which so exceeds every individual form and yet of whom
each individual thing is a house for his dwelling. For that great Reality is equal
Page 391

and infinite and the same in the individual and in the universe. And at first his
blindness, his treatment of this Divine as the mere outward man, his seeing of
only the mental and physical relation seems to him a sin against the
Mightiness that was there. For the being whom he called Krishna, Yadava,
comrade, was this immeasurable Greatness, this incomparable Might, this
Spirit one in all of whom all are the creations. That and not the veiling
outward humanity, \s{avaj\=anan} \s{m\=anu\,s\=i\.m tanum \=a\'sritam}, was what he
should have seen with awe and with submission and veneration.
\par But the second suggestion is that what was figured in the human
manifestation and the human relation is also a reality which accompanies and
mitigates for our mind the tremendous character of the universal vision. The
transcendence and cosmic aspect have to be seen, for without that seeing the
limitations of humanity cannot be exceeded. In that unifying oneness all has
to be included. But by itself that would set too great a gulf between the
transcendent spirit and this soul bound and circumscribed in an inferior
Nature. The infinite presence in its unmitigated splendour would be too
overwhelming for the separate littleness of the limited, individual and natural
man. A link is needed by which he can see this universal Godhead in his own
individual and natural being, close to him, not only omnipotently there to
govern all he is by universal and immeasurable Power, but humanly figured to
support and raise him to unity by an intimate individual relation. The adoration
by which the finite creature bows down before the Infinite, receives all its
sweetness and draws near to a closest truth of companionship and oneness
when it deepens into the more intimate adoration which lives in the sense of
the fatherhood of God, the friendhood of God, the attracting love between the
Divine Spirit and our human soul and nature. For the Divine inhabits the
human soul and body; he draws around him and wears like a robe the human
mind and figure. He assumes the human relations which the soul affects in
the mortal body and they find in God their own fullest sense and greatest
realisation. This is the Vaishnava bhakti of which the seed is here in the
Gita's words, but which received afterwards
Page 392

a more deep, ecstatic and significant extension.
\par And from this second suggestion a third immediately arises. The form of
the transcendent and universal Being is to the strength of the liberated spirit a
thing mighty, encouraging and fortifying, a source of power, an equalising,
sublimating, all-justifying vision; but to the normal man it is overwhelming,
appalling, incommunicable. The truth that reassures, even when known, is
grasped with difficulty behind the formidable and mighty aspect of
all-destructive Time and an incalculable Will and a vast immeasurable
inextricable working. But there is too the gracious mediating form of divine
Narayana, the God who is so close to man and in man, the Charioteer of the
battle and the journey, with his four arms of helpful power, a humanised
symbol of Godhead, not this million-armed universality. It is this mediating
aspect which man must have for his support constantly before him. For it is
this figure of Narayana which symbolises the truth that reassures. It makes
close, visible, living, seizable the vast spiritual joy in which for the inner spirit
and life of man the universal workings behind all their stupendous circling,
retrogression, progression sovereignly culminate, their marvellous and
auspicious upshot. To this humanised embodied soul their end becomes here
a union, a closeness, a constant companionship of man and God, man living in
the world for God, God dwelling in man and turning to his own divine ends in
him the enigmatic world-process. And beyond the end is a yet more
wonderful oneness and inliving in the last transfigurations of the Eternal.
\par The Godhead in answer to Arjuna's prayer reassumes his own normal
Narayana image, \s{svaka\.m r\=upam}, the desired form of grace and love and
sweetness and beauty. But first he declares the incalculable significance of
the other mighty Image which he is about to veil. “This that thou now seest,”
he tells him, “is my supreme shape, my form of luminous energy, the
universal, the original which none but thou amongst men has yet seen. I have
shown it by my self-Yoga. For it is an image of my very Self and Spirit, it is
the very Supreme self-figured in cosmic existence and the soul in perfect
Yoga with me sees it without any trembling
Page 393

of the nervous parts or any bewilderment and confusion of the mind, because
he descries not only what is terrible and overwhelming in its appearance, but
also its high and reassuring significance. And thou also shouldst so envisage it
without fear, without confusion of mind, without any sinking of the members;
but since the lower nature in thee is not yet prepared to look upon it with that
high strength and tranquillity, I will reassume again for thee my Narayana
figure in which the human mind sees isolated and toned to its humanity the
calm, helpfulness and delight of a friendly Godhead. The greater Form”—and
this is repeated again after it has disappeared—“is only for the rare highest
souls. The gods themselves ever desire to look upon it. It cannot be won by
Veda or austerities or gifts or sacrifice; it can be seen, known, entered into
only by that bhakti which regards, adores and loves Me alone in all things.”
\par But what then is the uniqueness of this Form by which it is lifted so far
beyond cognizance that all the ordinary endeavour of human knowledge and
even the inmost austerity of its spiritual effort are insufficient, unaided, to
reach the vision? It is this that man can know by other means this or that
exclusive aspect of the one existence, its individual, cosmic or
world-excluding figures, but not this greatest reconciling Oneness of all the
aspects of the Divinity in which at one and the same time and in one and the
same vision all is manifested, all is exceeded and all is consummated. For
here transcendent, universal and individual Godhead, Spirit and Nature,
Infinite and finite, space and time and timelessness, Being and Becoming, all
that we can strive to think and know of the Godhead, whether of the absolute
or the manifested existence, are wonderfully revealed in an ineffable
oneness. This vision can be reached only by the absolute adoration, the love,
the intimate unity that crowns at their summit the fullness of works and
knowledge. To know, to see, to enter into it, to be one with this supreme form
of the Supreme becomes then possible, and it is that end which the Gita
proposes for its Yoga. There is a supreme consciousness through which it is
possible to enter into the glory of the Transcendent and contain in him the
immutable Self and all mutable Becoming,—
Page 394

it is possible to be one with all, yet above all, to exceed world and yet
embrace the whole nature at once of the cosmic and the supracosmic
Godhead. This is difficult indeed for limited man imprisoned in his mind and
body: but, says the Godhead, “be a doer of my works, accept me as the
supreme being and object, become my bhakta, be free from attachment and
without enmity to all existences; for such a man comes to me.” In other
words superiority to the lower nature, unity with all creatures, oneness with
the cosmic Godhead and the Transcendence, oneness of will with the Divine
in works, absolute love for the One and for God in all,—this is the way to that
absolute spiritual self-exceeding and that unimaginable transformation.
Page 395

\par
\HN XII
\par
\ht The Way and the Bhakta
\par\drop In the eleventh chapter of the Gita the original object of the
teaching has been achieved and brought up to a certain completeness. The
command to divine action done for the sake of the world and in union with
the Spirit who dwells in it and in all its creatures and in whom all its working
takes place, has been given and accepted by the Vibhuti. The disciple has
been led away from the old poise of the normal man and the standards,
motives, outlook, egoistic consciousness of his ignorance, away from all that
had finally failed him in the hour of his spiritual crisis. The very action which
on that standing he had rejected, the terrible function, the appalling labour, he
has now been brought to admit and accept on a new inner basis. A
reconciling greater knowledge, a diviner consciousness, a high impersonal
motive, a spiritual standard of oneness with the will of the Divine acting on
the world from the fountain light and with the motive power of the spiritual
nature,—this is the new inner principle of works which is to transform the old
ignorant action. A knowledge which embraces oneness with the Divine and
arrives through the Divine at conscious oneness with all things and beings, a
will emptied of egoism and acting only by the command and as an
instrumentation of the secret Master of works, a divine love whose one
aspiration is towards a close intimacy with the supreme Soul of all existence,
accomplished by the unity of these three perfected powers an inner
all-comprehending unity with the transcendent and universal Spirit and Nature
and all creatures are the foundation offered for his activities to the liberated
man. For from that foundation the soul in him can suffer the instrumental
nature to act in safety; he is lifted above all cause of stumbling, delivered
from egoism and its limitations, rescued from all fear of sin and evil and
consequence, exalted out of that bondage to the outward nature
Page 396

and the limited action which is the knot of the Ignorance. He can act in the
power of the Light, no longer in twilight or darkness, and a divine sanction
upholds every step of his conduct. The difficulty which had been raised by
the antinomy between the freedom of the Spirit and the bondage of the soul
in Nature, has been solved by a luminous reconciliation of Spirit with Nature.
That antinomy exists for the mind in the ignorance; it ceases to exist for the
spirit in its knowledge.
\par But there is something more to be said in order to bring out all the
meaning of the great spiritual change. The twelfth chapter leads up to this
remaining knowledge and the last six that follow develop it to a grand final
conclusion. This thing that remains still to be said turns upon the difference
between the current Vedantic view of spiritual liberation and the larger
comprehensive freedom which the teaching of the Gita opens to the spirit.
There is now a pointed return to that difference. The current Vedantic way
led through the door of an austere and exclusive knowledge. The Yoga, the
oneness which it recognised as the means and the absorbing essence of the
spiritual release, was a Yoga of pure knowledge and a still oneness with a
supreme Immutable, an absolute Indefinable,—the unmanifested Brahman,
infinite, silent, intangible, aloof, far above all this universe of relations. In the
way proposed by the Gita knowledge is indeed the indispensable foundation,
but an integral knowledge. Impersonal integral works are the first
indispensable means; but a deep and large love and adoration, to which a
relationless Unmanifest, an aloof and immovable Brahman can return no
answer, since these things ask for a relation and an intimate personal
closeness, are the strongest and highest power for release and spiritual
perfection and the immortal Ananda. The Godhead with whom the soul of
man has to enter into this closest oneness, is indeed in his supreme status a
transcendent Unthinkable too great for any manifestation, Parabrahman; but
he is at the same time the living supreme Soul of all things. He is the supreme
Lord, the Master of works and universal nature. He at once exceeds and
inhabits as its self the soul and mind and body of the creature. He is
Purushottama, Parameshwara and
Page 397

Paramatman and in all these equal aspects the same single and eternal
Godhead. It is an awakening to this integral reconciling knowledge that is the
wide gate to the utter release of the soul and an unimaginable perfection of
the nature. It is this Godhead in the unity of all his aspects to whom our
works and our adoration and our knowledge have to be directed as a constant
inner sacrifice. It is this supreme soul, Purushottama, transcendent of the
universe, but also its containing spirit, inhabitant and possessor, even as it is
mightily figured in the vision of Kurukshetra, into whom the liberated spirit
has to enter once it has reached to the vision and knowledge of him in all the
principles and powers of his existence, once it is able to grasp and enjoy his
multitudinous oneness, \s{j\~n\=atu\.m dra\,s\,tu\.m tattvena prave\,s\,tu\.m ca}.
\par The liberation of the Gita is not a self-oblivious abolition of the soul's
personal being in the absorption of the One, \s{s\=ayujya mukti}; it is all kinds
of union at once. There is an entire unification with the supreme Godhead in
essence of being and intimacy of consciousness and identity of bliss,
\s{s\=ayujya},—for one object of this Yoga is to become Brahman,
\s{brahmabh\=uta}. There is an eternal ecstatic dwelling in the highest
existence of the Supreme, \s{s\=alokya},—for it is said, “Thou shalt dwell in
me,” \s{nivasi\,syasi mayyeva}. There is an eternal love and adoration in a
uniting nearness, there is an embrace of the liberated spirit by its divine Lover
and the enveloping Self of its infinitudes, \s{s\=am\=ipya}. There is an identity of
the soul's liberated nature with the divine nature, \s{s\=ad\,r\'sya mukti},—for the
perfection of the free spirit is to become even as the Divine, \s{madbh\=avam}
\s{\=agata\,h}, and to be one with him in the law of its being and the law of its
works and nature, \s{s\=adharmyam} \s{\=agata\,h}. The orthodox Yoga of
knowledge aims at a fathomless immergence in the one infinite existence,
\s{s\=ayujya}; it looks upon that alone as the entire liberation. The Yoga of
adoration envisages an eternal habitation or nearness as the greater release,
\s{s\=alokya}, \s{s\=am\=ipya}. The Yoga of works leads to oneness in power of
being and nature, \s{s\=ad\,r\'sya}. But the Gita envelops them all in its catholic
integrality and fuses them all into one greatest and richest divine freedom and
perfection.
\par Arjuna is made to raise the question of this difference. It
Page 398

must be remembered that the distinction between the impersonal immutable
Akshara Purusha and the supreme Soul that is at once impersonality and
divine Person and much more than either—that this capital distinction implied
in the later chapters and in the divine “I” of which Krishna has constantly
spoken, \s{aham}, \s{m\=am}, has as yet not been quite expressly and
definitely drawn. We have been throughout anticipating it in order to
understand from the beginning the full significance of the Gita's message and
not have to go back again, as we would otherwise be obliged, over the same
ground newly seen and prospected in the light of this greater truth. Arjuna
has been enjoined first to sink his separate personality in the calm
impersonality of the one eternal and immutable self, a teaching which agreed
well with his previous notions and offered no difficulties. But now he is
confronted with the vision of this greatest transcendent, this widest universal
Godhead and commanded to seek oneness with him by knowledge and works
and adoration. Therefore he asks the better to have a doubt cleared which
might otherwise have arisen, “Those devotees who thus by a constant union
seek after thee, \s{tv\=am}, and those who seek after the unmanifest
Immutable, which of these have the greater knowledge of Yoga?” This
recalls the distinction made in the beginning by such phrases as “in the self,
then in me,” \s{\=atmani atho mayi}: Arjuna points the distinction, \s{tv\=am},
\s{ak\,saram avyaktam}. Thou, he says in substance, art the supreme Source
and Origin of all beings, a Presence immanent in all things, a Power
pervading the universe with thy forms, a Person manifest in thy Vibhutis,
manifest in creatures, manifest in Nature, seated as the Lord of works in the
world and in our hearts by thy mighty world-Yoga. As such I have to know,
adore, unite myself with thee in all my being, consciousness, thoughts,
feelings and actions, \s{satata-yukta}. But what then of this Immutable who
never manifests, never puts on any form, stands back and apart from all
action, enters into no relation with the universe or with anything in it, is
eternally silent and one and impersonal and immobile? This eternal Self is the
greater Principle according to all current notions and the Godhead in the
manifestation is an inferior figure:
Page 399

the unmanifest and not the manifest is the eternal Spirit. How then does the
union which admits the manifestation, admits the lesser thing, come yet to be
the greater Yoga-knowledge?
\par To this question Krishna replies with an emphatic decisiveness. “Those
who found their mind in Me and by constant union, possessed of a supreme
faith, seek after Me, I hold to be the most perfectly in union of Yoga.” The
supreme faith is that which sees God in all and to its eye the manifestation
and the non-manifestation are one Godhead. The perfect union is that which
meets the Divine at every moment, in every action and with all the integrality
of the nature. But those also who seek by a hard ascent after the indefinable
unmanifest Immutable alone, arrive, says the Godhead, to Me. For they are
not mistaken in their aim, but they follow a more difficult and a less complete
and perfect path. At the easiest, to reach the unmanifest Absolute they have
to climb through the manifest Immutable here. This manifest Immutable is my
own all-pervading impersonality and silence; vast, unthinkable, immobile,
constant, omnipresent, it supports the action of personality but does not share
in it. It offers no hold to the mind; it can only be gained by a motionless
spiritual impersonality and silence and those who follow after it alone have to
restrain altogether and even draw in completely the action of the mind and
senses. But still by the equality of their understanding and by their seeing of
one self in all things and by their tranquil benignancy of silent will for the good
of all existences they too meet me in all objects and creatures. No less than
those who unite themselves with the Divine in all ways of their existence,
\s{sarva-bh\=avena}, and enter largely and fully into the unthinkable living
fountainhead of universal things, \s{divya\.m puru\,sam acintya-r\=upam}, these
seekers too who climb through this more difficult exclusive oneness towards
a relationless unmanifest Absolute find in the end the same Eternal. But this
is a less direct and more arduous way; it is not the full and natural movement
of the spiritualised human nature.
\par And it must not be thought that because it is more arduous, therefore it is
a higher and more effective process. The easier way of the Gita leads more
rapidly, naturally and normally to
Page 400

the same absolute liberation. For its acceptance of the divine Person does not
imply any attachment to the mental and sensuous limitations of embodied
Nature. On the contrary it brings a swift and effectual unchaining from the
phenomenal bondage of death and birth. The Yogin of exclusive knowledge
imposes on himself a painful struggle with the manifold demands of his
nature; he denies them even their highest satisfaction and cuts away from
him even the upward impulses of his spirit whenever they imply relations or
fall short of a negating absolute. The living way of the Gita on the contrary
finds out the most intense upward trend of all our being and by turning it
Godwards uses knowledge, will, feeling and the instinct for perfection as so
many puissant wings of a mounting liberation. The unmanifest Brahman in its
indefinable unity is a thing to which embodied souls can only arrive and that
hardly by a constant mortification, a suffering of all the repressed members, a
stern difficulty and anguish of the nature, \s{du\,hkham av\=apyate}, \s{kle\'so}
\s{'dhikataras} \s{te\,s\=am}. The indefinable Oneness accepts all that climb to
it, but offers no help of relation and gives no foothold to the climber. All has
to be done by a severe austerity and a stern and lonely individual effort. How
different is it for those who seek after the Purushottama in the way of the
Gita! When they meditate on him with a Yoga which sees none else, because
it sees all to be Vasudeva, he meets them at every point, in every movement,
at all times, with innumerable forms and faces, holds up the lamp of
knowledge within and floods with its divine and happy lustre the whole of
existence. Illumined, they discern the supreme Spirit in every form and face,
arrive at once through all Nature to the Lord of Nature, arrive through all
beings to the Soul of all being, arrive through themselves to the Self of all that
they are; incontinently they break through a hundred opening issues at once
into that from which everything has its origin. The other method of a difficult
relationless stillness tries to get away from all action even though that is
impossible to embodied creatures. Here the actions are all given up to the
supreme Master of action and he as the supreme Will meets the will of
sacrifice, takes from it its burden and assumes to himself the charge of the
works of
Page 401

the divine Nature in us. And when too in the high passion of love the devotee
of the Lover and Friend of man and of all creatures casts upon him all his
heart of consciousness and yearning of delight, then swiftly the Supreme
comes to him as the saviour and deliverer and exalts him by a happy embrace
of his mind and heart and body out of the waves of the sea of death in this
mortal nature into the secure bosom of the Eternal.
\par This then is the swiftest, largest and greatest way. On me, says the
Godhead to the soul of man, repose all thy mind and lodge all thy
understanding in me: I will lift them up bathed in the supernal blaze of the
divine love and will and knowledge to myself from whom these things flow.
Doubt not that thou shalt dwell in me above this mortal existence. The chain
of the limiting earthly nature cannot hold the immortal spirit exalted by the
passion, the power and the light of the eternal love, will and knowledge. No
doubt, on this way too there are difficulties; for there is the lower nature with
its fierce or dull downward gravitation which resists and battles against the
motion of ascent and clogs the wings of the exaltation and the upward
rapture. The divine consciousness even when it has been found at first in a
wonder of great moments or in calm and splendid durations, cannot at once
be altogether held or called back at will; there is felt often an inability to keep
the personal consciousness fixed steadily in the Divine; there are nights of
long exile from the Light, there are hours or moments of revolt, doubt or
failure. But still by the practice of union and by constant repetition of the
experience, that highest spirit grows upon the being and takes permanent
possession of the nature. Is this also found too difficult because of the power
and persistence of the outward-going movement of the mind? Then the way
is simple, to do all actions for the sake of the Lord of the action, so that every
outward-going movement of the mind shall be associated with the inner
spiritual truth of the being and called back even in the very movement to the
eternal reality and connected with its source. Then the presence of the
Purushottama will grow upon the natural man till he is filled with it and
becomes a godhead and a spirit; all life will become a constant remembering
of God
Page 402

and perfection too will grow and the unity of the whole existence of the
human soul with the supreme Existence.
\par But it may be that even this constant remembering of God and lifting up
of our works to him is felt to be beyond the power of the limited mind,
because in its forgetfulness it turns to the act and its outward object and will
not remember to look within and lay our every movement on the divine altar
of the Spirit. Then the way is to control the lower self in the act and do works
without desire of the fruit. All fruit has to be renounced, to be given up to the
Power that directs the work, and yet the work has to be done that is imposed
by It on the nature. For by this means the obstacle steadily diminishes and
easily disappears; the mind is left free to remember the Lord and to fix itself
in the liberty of the divine consciousness. And here the Gita gives an
ascending scale of potencies and assigns the palm of excellence to this Yoga
of desireless action. \s{Abhy\=asa}, practice of a method, repetition of an
effort and experience is a great and powerful thing; but better than this is
knowledge, the successful and luminous turning of the thought to the Truth
behind things. This thought-knowledge too is excelled by a silent complete
concentration on the Truth so that the consciousness shall eventually live in it
and be always one with it. But more powerful still is the giving up of the fruit
of one's works, because that immediately destroys all causes of disturbance
and brings and preserves automatically an inner calm and peace, and calm
and peace are the foundation on which all else becomes perfect and secure
in possession by the tranquil spirit. Then the consciousness can be at ease,
happily fix itself in the Divine and rise undisturbed to perfection. Then too
knowledge, will and devotion can lift their pinnacles from a firm soil of solid
calm into the ether of Eternity.
\par What then will be the divine nature, what will be the greater state of
consciousness and being of the bhakta who has followed this way and turned
to the adoration of the Eternal? The Gita in a number of verses rings the
changes on its first insistent demand, on equality, on desirelessness, on
freedom of spirit. This is to be the base always,—and that was why so much
stress was laid on it in the beginning. And in that equality bhakti, the love and
Page 403

adoration of the Purushottama must rear the spirit towards some greatest
highest perfection of which this calm equality will be the wide foundation.
Several formulas of this fundamental equal consciousness are given here.
First, an absence of egoism, of I-ness and my-ness, \s{nirmamo
niraha\.nk\=ara\,h}. The bhakta of the Purushottama is one who has a universal
heart and mind which has broken down all the narrow walls of the ego. A
universal love dwells in his heart, a universal compassion flows from it like an
encompassing sea. He will have friendship and pity for all beings and hate for
no living thing: for he is patient, long-suffering, enduring, a well of
forgiveness. A desireless content is his, a tranquil equality to pleasure and
pain, suffering and happiness, the steadfast control of self and the firm
unshakable will and resolution of the Yogin and a love and devotion which
gives up the whole mind and reason to the Lord, to the Master of his
consciousness and knowledge. Or, simply, he will be one who is freed from
the troubled agitated lower nature and from its waves of joy and fear and
anxiety and resentment and desire, a spirit of calm by whom the world is not
afflicted or troubled, nor is he afflicted or troubled by the world, a soul of
peace with whom all are at peace.
\par Or he will be one who has given up all desire and action to the Master of
his being, one pure and still, indifferent to whatever comes, not pained or
afflicted by any result or happening, one who has flung away from him all
egoistic, personal and mental initiative whether of the inner or the outer act,
one who lets the divine will and divine knowledge flow through him
undeflected by his own resolves, preferences and desires, and yet for that
very reason is swift and skilful in all action of his nature, because this
flawless unity with the supreme will, this pure instrumentation is the condition
of the greatest skill in works. Again, he will be one who neither desires the
pleasant and rejoices at its touch nor abhors the unpleasant and sorrows at its
burden. He has abolished the distinction between fortunate and unfortunate
happenings, because his devotion receives all things equally as good from the
hands of his eternal Lover and Master. The God-lover dear to God is a soul
of wide equality,
Page 404

equal to friend and enemy, equal to honour and insult, pleasure and pain,
praise and blame, grief and happiness, heat and cold, to all that troubles with
opposite affections the normal nature. He will have no attachment to person
or thing, place or home; he will be content and well-satisfied with whatever
surroundings, whatever relation men adopt to him, whatever station or
fortune. He will keep a mind firm in all things, because it is constantly seated
in the highest self and fixed for ever on the one divine object of his love and
adoration. Equality, desirelessness and freedom from the lower egoistic
nature and its claims are always the one perfect foundation demanded by the
Gita for the great liberation. There is to the end an emphatic repetition of its
first fundamental teaching and original desideratum, the calm soul of
knowledge that sees the one self in all things, the tranquil egoless equality that
results from this knowledge, the desireless action offered in that equality to
the Master of works, the surrender of the whole mental nature of man into
the hands of the mightier indwelling spirit. And the crown of this equality is
love founded on knowledge, fulfilled in instrumental action, extended to all
things and beings, a vast absorbing and all-containing love for the divine Self
who is Creator and Master of the universe, \s{suh\,rda\.m sarva-bh\=ut\=an\=a\.m
sarva-loka-mahe\'svaram}.
\par This is the foundation, the condition, the means by which the supreme
spiritual perfection is to be won, and those who have it in any way are all
dear to me, says the Godhead, \s{bhaktim\=an me priya\,h}. But exceedingly
dear, \s{at\=iva me priy\=a\,h}, are those souls nearest to the Godhead whose love
of me is completed by the still wider and greatest perfection of which I have
just shown to you the way and the process. These are the bhaktas who make
the Purushottama their one supreme aim and follow out with a perfect faith
and exactitude the immortalising Dharma described in this teaching. Dharma
in the language of the Gita means the innate law of the being and its works
and an action proceeding from and determined by the inner nature,
\s{svabh\=ava-niyata\.m karma}. In the lower ignorant consciousness of mind,
life and body there are many dharmas, many rules, many standards and laws
because there are many varying determinations and types
Page 405

of the mental, vital and physical nature. The immortal Dharma is one; it is
that of the highest spiritual divine consciousness and its powers, \s{par\=a
prak\,rti\,h}. It is beyond the three gunas, and to reach it all these lower
dharmas have to be abandoned, \s{sarva-dharm\=an parityajya}. Alone in their
place the one liberating unifying consciousness and power of the Eternal has
to become the infinite source of our action, its mould, determinant and
exemplar. To rise out of our lower personal egoism, to enter into the
impersonal and equal calm of the immutable eternal all-pervading Akshara
Purusha, to aspire from that calm by a perfect self-surrender of all one's
nature and existence to that which is other and higher than the Akshara, is
the first necessity of this Yoga. In the strength of that aspiration one can rise
to the immortal Dharma. There, made one in being, consciousness and divine
bliss with the greatest Uttama Purusha, made one with his supreme dynamic
nature-force, \s{sv\=a prak\,rti\,h}, the liberated spirit can know infinitely, love
illimitably, act unfalteringly in the authentic power of a highest immortality
and a perfect freedom. The rest of the Gita is written to throw a fuller light
on this immortal Dharma.
Page 406

\part
\par
\ht THE SUPREME SECRET

\chapter
\par
Page 407

\HN XIII
\par
\ht The Field and its Knower
\note{Gita, XIII.}
\par\drop The Gita in its last six chapters, in order to found on a clear and
complete knowledge the way of the soul's rising out of the lower into the
divine nature, restates in another form the enlightenment the Teacher has
already imparted to Arjuna. Essentially it is the same knowledge, but details
and relations are now made prominent and assigned their entire significance,
thoughts and truths brought out in their full value that were alluded to only in
passing or generally stated in the light of another purpose. Thus in the first six
chapters the knowledge necessary for the distinction between the immutable
self and the soul veiled in nature was accorded an entire prominence. The
references to the supreme Self and Purusha were summary and not at all
explicit; it was assumed in order to justify works in the world and it was
affirmed to be the Master of being, but there was otherwise nothing to show
what it was and its relations to the rest were not even hinted at, much less
developed. The remaining chapters are devoted to the bringing out of this
suppressed knowledge in a conspicuous light and strong pre-eminence. It is to
the Lord, the Ishwara, it is to the distinction of the higher and the lower
nature and to the vision of the all-originating and all-constituting Godhead in
Nature, it is to the One in all beings that prominence has been assigned in the
next six Adhyayas (7-12) in order to found a root-unity of works and love
with knowledge. But now it is necessary to bring out more definitely the
precise relations between the supreme Purusha, the immutable self, the Jiva
and Prakriti in her action and her gunas. Arjuna is therefore made to put a
question which shall evoke a clearer elucidation of these still ill-lighted
matters. He asks to learn of the Purusha and the Prakriti; he inquires of the
Page 409

field of being and the knower of the field and of knowledge and the object of
knowledge. Here is contained the sum of all the knowledge of self and the
world that is still needed if the soul is to throw off its natural ignorance and
staying its steps on a right use of knowledge, of life, of works and of its own
relations with the Divine in these things ascend into unity of being with the
eternal Spirit of existence.
\par The essence of the Gita's ideas in these matters has already, anticipating
the final evolution of its thought, been elucidated in a certain measure; but,
following its example, we may state them again from the point of view of its
present preoccupation. Action being admitted, a divine action done with
self-knowledge as the instrument of the divine Will in the cosmos being
accepted as perfectly consistent with the Brahmic status and an
indispensable part of the Godward movement, that action being uplifted
inwardly as a sacrifice with adoration to the Highest, how does this way
practically affect the great object of spiritual life, the rising from the lower
into the higher nature, from mortal into immortal being? All life, all works are
a transaction between the soul and Nature. What is the original character of
that transaction? what does it become at its spiritual culminating point? to
what perfection does it lead the soul that gets free from its lower and
external motives and grows inwardly into the very highest poise of the Spirit
and deepest motive-force of the works of its energy in the universe? These
are the questions involved,—there are others which the Gita does not raise or
answer, for they were not pressingly present to the human mind of that
day,—and they are replied to in the sense of the solution drawn from a
large-sighted combination of the Vedantic, Sankhya and Yoga views of
existence which is the starting-point of the whole thought of the Gita.
\par The Soul which finds itself here embodied in Nature has a triple reality to
its own self-experience. First it is a spiritual being apparently subjected by
ignorance to the outward workings of Prakriti and represented in her mobility
as an acting, thinking, mutable personality, a creature of Nature, an ego. Next
when it gets behind all this action and motion, it finds its own higher
Page 410

reality to be an eternal and impersonal self and immutable spirit which has no
other share in the action and movement than to support it by its presence and
regard it as an undisturbed equal witness. And last, when it looks beyond
these two opposite selves, it discovers a greater ineffable Reality from which
both proceed, the Eternal who is Self of the self and the Master of all Nature
and all action, and not only the Master, but the origin and the spiritual support
and scene of these workings of his own energy in Cosmos, and not only the
origin and spiritual container, but the spiritual inhabitant in all forces, in all
things and in all beings, and not only the inhabitant but, by the developments
of this eternal energy of his being which we call Nature, himself all energies
and forces, all things and all beings. This Nature itself is of two kinds, one
derived and inferior, another original and supreme. There is a lower nature of
the cosmic mechanism by association with which the soul in Prakriti lives in a
certain ignorance born of Maya, \s{traigu\,nyamay\=i m\=ay\=a}, conceives of itself
as an ego of embodied mind and life, works under the power of the modes of
Nature, thinks itself bound, suffering, limited by personality, chained to the
obligation of birth and the wheel of action, a thing of desires, transient, mortal,
a slave of its own nature. Above this inferior power of existence there is a
higher divine and spiritual nature of its own true being in which this soul is for
ever a conscious portion of the Eternal and Divine, blissful, free, superior to
its mask of becoming, immortal, imperishable, a power of the Godhead. To
rise by this higher nature to the Eternal through divine knowledge, love and
works founded on a spiritual universality is the key of the complete spiritual
liberation. This much has been made clear; and we have to see now more in
detail what farther considerations this change of being involves and especially
what is the difference between these two natures and how our action and our
soul-status are affected by the liberation. For that purpose the Gita enters
largely into certain details of the highest knowledge which it had hitherto kept
in the background. Especially it dwells on the relation between Being and
becoming, Soul and Nature, the action of the three gunas, the highest
liberation, the largest fullest self-giving
Page 411

of the human soul to the Divine Spirit. There is in all that it says in these
closing six chapters much of the greatest importance, but it is the last thought
with which it closes that is of supreme interest; for in it we shall find the
central idea of its teaching, its great word to the soul of man, its highest
message.
\par First, the whole of existence must be regarded as a field of the soul's
construction and action in the midst of Nature. The Gita explains the
\s{k\,setram}, field, by saying that it is this body which is called the field of the
spirit, and in this body there is someone who takes cognizance of the field,
\s{k\,setraj\~na}, the knower of Nature. It is evident, however, from the
definitions that succeed that it is not the physical body alone which is the
field, but all too that the body supports, the working of nature, the mentality,
the natural action of the objectivity and subjectivity of our being.
\note{The Upanishad speaks of a fivefold body or sheath of Nature, a
physical, vital, mental, ideal and divine body; this may be regarded as the
totality of the field, \s{k\,setram}.} This wider body too is only the individual
field; there is a larger, a universal, a world-body, a world-field of the same
Knower. For in each embodied creature there is this one Knower: in each
existence he uses mainly and centrally this single outward result of the power
of his nature which he has formed for his habitation, \s{\=i\'s\=a v\=asya\.m sarva\.m
yat ki\~nca}, makes each separate sustained knot of his mobile Energy the first
base and scope of his developing harmonies. In Nature he knows the world
as it affects and is reflected by the consciousness in this one limited body; the
world exists to us as it is seen in our single mind,—and in the end, even, this
seemingly small embodied consciousness can so enlarge itself that it contains
in itself the whole universe, \s{\=atmani vi\'sva-dar\'sanam}. But, physically, it is a
microcosm in a macrocosm, and the macrocosm too, the large world too, is a
body and field inhabited by the spiritual knower.
\par That becomes evident when the Gita proceeds to state the character,
nature, source, deformations, powers of this sensible embodiment of our
being. We see then that it is the whole working of the lower Prakriti that is
meant by the \s{k\,setra}. That totality is the field of action of the embodied
spirit here within us, the
Page 412

field of which it takes cognizance. For a varied and detailed knowledge of all
this world of Nature in its essential action as seen from the spiritual
view-point we are referred to the verses of the ancient seers, the seers of the
Veda and Upanishads, in which we get the inspired and intuitive account of
these creations of the Spirit, and to the Brahma Sutras which will give us the
rational and philosophic analysis. The Gita contents itself with a brief
practical statement of the lower nature of our being in the terms of the
Sankhya thinkers. First there is the indiscriminate unmanifest Energy; out of
that has come the objective evolution of the five elemental states of matter;
as also the subjective evolution of the senses, intelligence and ego; there are
too five objects of the senses, or rather five different ways of sense
cognizance of the world, powers evolved by the universal energy in order to
deal with all the forms of things she has created from the five elemental
states assumed by her original objective substance,—organic relations by
which the ego endowed with intelligence and sense acts on the formations of
the cosmos: this is the constitution of the kshetra. Then there is a general
consciousness that first informs and then illumines the Energy in its works;
there is a faculty of that consciousness by which the Energy holds together
the relations of objects; there is too a continuity, a persistence of the
subjective and objective relations of our consciousness with its objects. These
are the necessary powers of the field; all these are common and universal
powers at once of the mental, vital and physical Nature. Pleasure and pain,
liking and disliking are the principal deformations of the kshetra. From the
Vedantic point of view we may say that pleasure and pain are the vital or
sensational deformations given by the lower energy to the spontaneous
Ananda or delight of the spirit when brought into contact with her workings.
And we may say from the same view-point that liking and disliking are the
corresponding mental deformations given by her to the reactive Will of the
spirit that determines its response to her contacts. These dualities are the
positive and negative terms in which the ego soul of the lower nature enjoys
the universe. The negative terms, pain, dislike, sorrow, repulsion and the rest,
are
Page 413

perverse or at the best ignorantly reverse responses: the positive terms, liking,
pleasure, joy, attraction, are ill-guided responses or at the best insufficient and
in character inferior to those of the true spiritual experience.
\par All these things taken together constitute the fundamental character of
our first transactions with the world of Nature, but it is evidently not the
whole description of our being; it is our actuality but not the limit of our
possibilities. There is something beyond to be known, \s{j\~neyam}, and it is
when the knower of the field turns from the field itself to learn of himself
within it and of all that is behind its appearances that real knowledge begins,
\s{j\~n\=anam},—the true knowledge of the field no less than of the knower.
That turning inward alone delivers from ignorance. For the farther we go
inward, the more we seize on greater and fuller realities of things and grasp
the complete truth both of God and the soul and of the world and its
movements. Therefore, says the divine Teacher, it is the knowledge at once
of the field and its knower, \s{k\,setra-k\,setraj\~nayor j\~n\=anam}, a united and even
unified self-knowledge and world-knowledge, which is the real illumination
and the only wisdom. For both soul and nature are the Brahman, but the true
truth of the world of Nature can only be discovered by the liberated sage
who possesses also the truth of the spirit. One Brahman, one reality in Self
and Nature is the object of all knowledge.
\par The Gita then tells us what is the spiritual knowledge or rather it tells us
what are the conditions of knowledge, the marks, the signs of the man whose
soul is turned towards the inner wisdom. These signs are the recognised and
traditional characteristics of the sage,—his strong turning away of the heart
from attachment to outward and worldly things, his inward and brooding
spirit, his steady mind and calm equality, the settled fixity of his thought and
will upon the greatest inmost truths, upon the things that are real and eternal.
First, there comes a certain moral condition, a sattwic government of the
natural being. There is fixed in him a total absence of worldly pride and
arrogance, a candid soul, a tolerant, long-suffering and benignant heart, purity
of mind and body, tranquil firmness
Page 414

and steadfastness, self-control and a masterful government of the lower
nature and the heart's worship given to the Teacher, whether to the divine
Teacher within or to the human Master in whom the divine Wisdom is
embodied,—for that is the sense of the reverence given to the Guru. Then
there is a nobler and freer attitude towards the outward world, an attitude of
perfect detachment and equality, a firm removal of the natural being's
attraction to the objects of the senses and a radical freedom from the claims
of that constant clamorous ego-sense, ego-idea, ego-motive which tyrannises
over the normal man. There is no longer any clinging to the attachment and
absorption of family and home. There is instead of these vital and animal
movements an unattached will and sense and intelligence, a keen perception
of the defective nature of the ordinary life of physical man with its aimless
and painful subjection to birth and death and disease and age, a constant
equalness to all pleasant or unpleasant happenings,—for the soul is seated
within and impervious to the shocks of external events,—and a meditative
mind turned towards solitude and away from the vain noise of crowds and
the assemblies of men. Finally, there is a strong turn within towards the things
that really matter, a philosophic perception of the true sense and large
principles of existence, a tranquil continuity of inner spiritual knowledge and
light, the Yoga of an unswerving devotion, love of God, the heart's deep and
constant adoration of the universal and eternal Presence.
\par The one object to which the mind of spiritual knowledge must be turned
is the Eternal by fixity in whom the soul clouded here and swathed in the
mists of Nature recovers and enjoys its native and original consciousness of
immortality and transcendence. To be fixed on the transient, to be limited in
the phenomenon is to accept mortality; the constant truth in things that perish
is that in them which is inward and immutable. The soul when it allows itself
to be tyrannised over by the appearances of Nature, misses itself and goes
whirling about in the cycle of the births and deaths of its bodies. There,
passionately following without end the mutations of personality and its
interests, it cannot draw back to the possession of its
Page 415

impersonal and unborn self-existence. To be able to do that is to find oneself
and get back to one's true being, that which assumes these births but does not
perish with the perishing of its forms. To enjoy the eternity to which birth and
life are only outward circumstances, is the soul's true immortality and
transcendence. That Eternal or that Eternity is the Brahman. Brahman is
That which is transcendent and That which is universal: it is the free spirit
who supports in front the play of soul with nature and assures behind their
imperishable oneness; it is at once the mutable and the immutable, the All that
is the One. In his highest supracosmic status Brahman is a transcendent
Eternity without origin or change far above the phenomenal oppositions of
existence and non-existence, persistence and transience between which the
outward world moves. But once seen in the substance and light of this
eternity, the world also becomes other than it seems to the mind and senses;
for then we see the universe no longer as a whirl of mind and life and matter
or a mass of the determinations of energy and substance, but as no other than
this eternal Brahman. A spirit who immeasurably fills and surrounds all this
movement with himself—for indeed the movement too is himself—and who
throws on all that is finite the splendour of his garment of infinity, a bodiless
and million-bodied spirit whose hands of strength and feet of swiftness are on
every side of us, whose heads and eyes and faces are those innumerable
visages which we see wherever we turn, whose ear is everywhere listening
to the silence of eternity and the music of the worlds, is the universal Being in
whose embrace we live.
\par All relations of Soul and Nature are circumstances in the eternity of
Brahman; sense and quality, their reflectors and constituents, are this
supreme Soul's devices for the presentation of the workings that his own
energy in things constantly liberates into movement. He is himself beyond the
limitation of the senses, sees all things but not with the physical eye, hears all
things but not with the physical ear, is aware of all things but not with the
limiting mind—mind which represents but cannot truly know. Not determined
by any qualities, he possesses and determines in his substance all qualities
and enjoys this qualitative action of
Page 416

his own Nature. He is attached to nothing, bound by nothing, fixed to nothing
that he does; calm, he supports in a large and immortal freedom all the action
and movement and passion of his universal Shakti. He becomes all that is in
the universe; that which is in us is he and all that we experience outside
ourselves is he. The inward and the outward, the far and the near, the moving
and the unmoving, all this he is at once. He is the subtlety of the subtle which
is beyond our knowledge, even as he is the density of force and substance
which offers itself to the grasp of our minds. He is indivisible and the One,
but seems to divide himself in forms and creatures and appears as all these
separate existences. All things can get back in him, can return in the Spirit to
the indivisible unity of their self-existence. All is eternally born from him,
upborne in his eternity, taken eternally back into his oneness. He is the light
of all lights and luminous beyond all the darkness of our ignorance. He is
knowledge and the object of knowledge. The spiritual supramental knowledge
that floods the illumined mind and transfigures it is this spirit manifesting
himself in light to the force-obscured soul which he has put forth into the
action of Nature. This eternal Light is in the heart of every being; it is he who
is the secret knower of the field, \s{k\,setraj\~na}, and presides as the Lord in
the heart of things over this province and over all these kingdoms of his
manifested becoming and action. When man sees this eternal and universal
Godhead within himself, when he becomes aware of the soul in all things and
discovers the spirit in Nature, when he feels all the universe as a wave
mounting in this Eternity and all that is as the one existence, he puts on the
light of Godhead and stands free in the midst of the worlds of Nature. A
divine knowledge and a perfect turning with adoration to this Divine is the
secret of the great spiritual liberation. Freedom, love and spiritual knowledge
raise us from mortal nature to immortal being.
\par The Soul and Nature are only two aspects of the eternal Brahman, an
apparent duality which founds the operations of his universal existence. The
Soul is without origin and eternal, Nature too is without origin and eternal; but
the modes of Nature and the lower forms she assumes to our conscious
Page 417

experience have an origin in the transactions of these two entities. They
come from her, wear by her the outward chain of cause and effect, doing
and the results of doing, force and its workings, all that is here transient and
mutable. Constantly they change and the soul and Nature seem to change
with them, but in themselves these two powers are eternal and always the
same. Nature creates and acts, the Soul enjoys her creation and action; but in
this inferior form of her action she turns this enjoyment into the obscure and
petty figures of pain and pleasure. Forcibly the soul, the individual Purusha, is
attracted by her qualitative workings and this attraction of her qualities draws
him constantly to births of all kinds in which he enjoys the variations and
vicissitudes, the good and evil of birth in Nature. But this is only the outward
experience of the soul mutable in conception by identification with mutable
Nature. Seated in this body is her and our Divinity, the supreme Self,
Paramatman, the supreme Soul, the mighty Lord of Nature, who watches her
action, sanctions her operations, upholds all she does, commands her manifold
creation, enjoys with his universal delight this play of her figures of his own
being. That is the self-knowledge to which we have to accustom our
mentality before we can truly know ourselves as an eternal portion of the
Eternal. Once that is fixed, no matter how the soul in us may comport itself
outwardly in its transactions with Nature, whatever it may seem to do or
however it may seem to assume this or that figure of personality and active
force and embodied ego, it is in itself free, no longer bound to birth because
one through impersonality of self with the inner unborn spirit of existence.
That impersonality is our union with the supreme egoless I of all that is in
cosmos.
\par This knowledge comes by an inner meditation through which the eternal
self becomes apparent to us in our own self-existence. Or it comes by the
Yoga of the Sankhyas, the separation of the soul from nature. Or it comes by
the Yoga of works in which the personal will is dissolved through the opening
up of our mind and heart and all our active forces to the Lord who assumes
to himself the whole of our works in nature. The spiritual knowledge may be
awakened by the
Page 418

urging of the spirit within us, its call to this or that Yoga, this or that way of
oneness. Or it may come to us by hearing of the truth from others and the
moulding of the mind into the sense of that to which it listens with faith and
concentration. But however arrived at, it carries us beyond death to
immortality. Knowledge shows us high above the mutable transactions of the
soul with the mortality of nature our highest Self as the supreme Lord of her
actions, one and equal in all objects and creatures, not born in the taking up of
a body, not subject to death in the perishing of all these bodies. That is the
true seeing, the seeing of that in us which is eternal and immortal. As we
perceive more and more this equal spirit in all things, we pass into that
equality of the spirit; as we dwell more and more in this universal being, we
become ourselves universal beings; as we grow more and more aware of this
eternal, we put on our own eternity and are for ever. We identify ourselves
with the eternity of the self and no longer with the limitation and distress of
our mental and physical ignorance. Then we see that all our works are an
evolution and operation of Nature and our real self not the executive doer, but
the free witness and lord and unattached enjoyer of the action. All this
surface of cosmic movement is a diverse becoming of natural existences in
the one eternal Being, all is extended, manifested, rolled out by the universal
Energy from the seeds of her Idea deep in his existence; but the spirit even
though it takes up and enjoys her workings in this body of ours, is not
affected by its mortality because it is eternal beyond birth and death, is not
limited by the personalities which it multiply assumes in her because it is the
one supreme self of all these personalities, is not changed by the mutations of
quality because it is itself undetermined by quality, does not act even in
action, \s{kart\=aram api akart\=aram}, because it supports natural action in a
perfect spiritual freedom from its effects, is the originator indeed of all
activities, but in no way changed or affected by the play of its Nature. As the
all-pervading ether is not affected or changed by the multiple forms it
assumes, but remains always the same pure subtle original substance, even
so this spirit when it has done and become all
Page 419

possible things, remains through it all the same pure immutable subtle infinite
essence. That is the supreme status of the soul, \s{par\=a gati\,h}, that is the
divine being and nature, \s{madbh\=ava}, and whoever arrives at spiritual
knowledge, rises to that supreme immortality of the Eternal.
\par This Brahman, this eternal and spiritual knower of the field of his own
natural becoming, this Nature, his perpetual energy, which converts herself
into that field, this immortality of the soul in mortal nature,—these things
together make the whole reality of our existence. The spirit within, when we
turn to it, illumines the entire field of Nature with its own truth in all the
splendour of its rays. In the light of that sun of knowledge the eye of
knowledge opens in us and we live in that truth and no longer in this
ignorance. Then we perceive that our limitation to our present mental and
physical nature was an error of the darkness, then we are liberated from the
law of the lower Prakriti, the law of the mind and body, then we attain to the
supreme nature of the spirit. That splendid and lofty change is the last, the
divine and infinite becoming, the putting off of mortal nature, the putting on of
an immortal existence.
Page 420

\par
\HN XIV
\par
\ht Above the Gunas
\note{Gita, XIV.}
\par\drop The distinctions between the Soul and Nature rapidly drawn in the
verses of the thirteenth chapter by a few decisive epithets, a few brief but
packed characterisations of their separate power and functioning, and
especially the distinction between the embodied soul subjected to the action
of Nature by its enjoyment of her gunas, qualities or modes and the Supreme
Soul which dwells enjoying the gunas, but not subject because it is itself
beyond them, are the basis on which the Gita rests its whole idea of the
liberated being made one in the conscious law of its existence with the
Divine. That liberation, that oneness, that putting on of the divine nature,
\s{s\=adharmya}, it declares to be the very essence of spiritual freedom and
the whole significance of immortality. This supreme importance assigned to
\s{s\=adharmya} is a capital point in the teaching of the Gita.
\par To be immortal was never held in the ancient spiritual teaching to consist
merely in a personal survival of the death of the body: all beings are immortal
in that sense and it is only the forms that perish. The souls that do not arrive
at liberation, live through the returning aeons; all exist involved or secret in
the Brahman during the dissolution of the manifest worlds and are born again
in the appearance of a new cycle. Pralaya, the end of a cycle of aeons, is the
temporary disintegration of a universal form of existence and of all the
individual forms which move in its rounds, but that is only a momentary
pause, a silent interval followed by an outburst of new creation, reintegration
and reconstruction in which they reappear and recover the impetus of their
progression. Our physical death is also a pralaya,—the Gita will presently use
the word in the sense of this death,
Page 421

\s{pralaya\.m y\=ati} \s{deha-bh\,rt}, “the soul bearing the body comes to a
pralaya,” to a disintegration of that form of matter with which its ignorance
identified its being and which now dissolves into the natural elements. But the
soul itself persists and after an interval resumes in a new body formed from
those elements its round of births in the cycle, just as after the interval of
pause and cessation the universal Being resumes his endless round of the
cyclic aeons. This immortality in the rounds of Time is common to all
embodied spirits.
\par To be immortal in the deeper sense is something different from this
survival of death and this constant recurrence. Immortality is that supreme
status in which the Spirit knows itself to be superior to death and birth, not
conditioned by the nature of its manifestation, infinite, imperishable,
immutably eternal,—immortal, because never being born it never dies. The
divine Purushottama, who is the supreme Lord and supreme Brahman,
possesses for ever this immortal eternity and is not affected by his taking up
a body or by his continuous assumption of cosmic forms and powers because
he exists always in this self-knowledge. His very nature is to be
unchangeably conscious of his own eternity; he is self-aware without end or
beginning. He is here the Inhabitant of all bodies, but as the unborn in every
body, not limited in his consciousness by that manifestation, not identified with
the physical nature which he assumes; for that is only a minor circumstance
of his universal activised play of existence. Liberation, immortality is to live in
this unchangeably conscious eternal being of the Purushottama.
\note{Mark that nowhere in the Gita is there any indication that dissolution of
the individual spiritual being into the unmanifest, indefinable or absolute
Brahman, \s{avyaktam anirde\'syam}, is the true meaning or condition of
immortality or the true aim of Yoga. On the contrary it describes immortality
later on as an indwelling in the Ishwara in his supreme status, \s{mayi
nivasi\,syasi}, \s{para\.m dh\=ama}, and here as \s{s\=adharmya}, \s{par\=a\.m
siddhim}, a supreme perfection, a becoming of one law of being and nature
with the Supreme, persistent still in existence and conscious of the universal
movement but above it, as all the sages still exist, \s{munaya\,h sarve}, not
bound to birth in the creation, not troubled by the dissolution of the cycles.}
But to arrive here at this greater spiritual immortality the embodied soul must
cease to live according to the law of the lower nature; it must
Page 422

put on the law of the Divine's supreme way of existence which is in fact the
real law of its own eternal essence. In the spiritual evolution of its becoming,
no less than in its secret original being, it must grow into the likeness of the
Divine.
\par And this great thing, to rise from the human into the divine nature, we
can only do by an effort of Godward knowledge, will and adoration. For the
soul sent forth by the Supreme as his eternal portion, his immortal
representative into the workings of universal Nature is yet obliged by the
character of those workings, \s{ava\'sa\.m prak\,rter va\'s\=at}, to identify itself in its
external consciousness with her limiting conditions, to identify itself with a
life, mind and body that are oblivious of their inner spiritual reality and of the
innate Godhead. To get back to self-knowledge and to the knowledge of the
real as distinct from the apparent relations of the soul with Nature, to know
God and ourselves and the world with a spiritual and no longer with a
physical or externalised experience, through the deepest truth of the inner
soul-consciousness and not through the misleading phenomenal significances
of the sense-mind and the outward understanding, is an indispensable means
of this perfection. Perfection cannot come without self-knowledge and
God-knowledge and a spiritual attitude towards our natural existence, and
that is why the ancient wisdom laid so much stress on salvation by
knowledge,—not an intellectual cognizance of things, but a growing of man
the mental being into a greater spiritual consciousness. The soul's salvation
cannot come without the soul's perfection, without its growing into the divine
nature; the impartial Godhead will not effect it for us by an act of caprice or
an arbitrary {\it sanad} of his favour. Divine works are effective for salvation
because they lead us towards this perfection and to a knowledge of self and
nature and God by a growing unity with the inner Master of our existence.
Divine love is effective because by it we grow into the likeness of the sole
and supreme object of our adoration and call down the answering love of the
Highest to flood us with the light of his knowledge and the uplifting power
and purity of his eternal spirit. Therefore, says the Gita, this is the supreme
knowledge and
Page 423

the highest of all knowings because it leads to the highest perfection and
spiritual status, \s{par\=a\.m siddhim}, and brings the soul to likeness with the
Divine, \s{s\=adharmya}. It is the eternal wisdom, the great spiritual experience
by which all the sages attained to that highest perfection, grew into one law
of being with the Supreme and live for ever in his eternity, not born in the
creation, not troubled by the anguish of the universal dissolution. This
perfection, then, this \s{s\=adharmya} is the way of immortality and the
indispensable condition without which the soul cannot consciously live in the
Eternal.
\par The soul of man could not grow into the likeness of the Divine, if it were
not in its secret essence imperishably one with the Divine and part and parcel
of his divinity: it could not be or become immortal if it were merely a creature
of mental, vital and physical Nature. All existence is a manifestation of the
divine Existence and that which is within us is spirit of the eternal Spirit. We
have come indeed into the lower material nature and are under its influence,
but we have come there from the supreme spiritual nature: this inferior
imperfect status is our apparent, but that our real being. The Eternal puts all
this movement forth as his self-creation. He is at once the Father and Mother
of the universe; the substance of the infinite Idea, \s{vij\~n\=ana}, the Mahad
Brahman, is the womb into which he casts the seed of his self-conception.
As the Over-Soul he casts the seed; as the Mother, the Nature-Soul, the
Energy filled with his conscious power, he receives it into this infinite
substance of being made pregnant with his illimitable, yet self-limiting Idea.
He receives into this Vast of self-conception and develops there the divine
embryo into mental and physical form of existence born from the original act
of conceptive creation. All we see springs from that act of creation; but that
which is born here is only finite idea and form of the unborn and infinite. The
Spirit is eternal and superior to all its manifestation: Nature, eternal without
beginning in the Spirit, proceeds for ever with the rhythm of the cycles by
unending act of creation and unconcluding act of cessation; the Soul too
which takes on this or that form in Nature, is no less eternal than she,
\s{an\=ad\=i ubh\=av api}. Even while in Nature it follows the unceasing round of
the cycles, it is, in the Eternal
Page 424

from which it proceeds into them, for ever raised above the terms of birth
and death, and even in its apparent consciousness here it can become aware
of that innate and constant transcendence.
\par What is it then that makes the difference, what is it that gets the soul into
the appearance of birth and death and bondage,—for this is patent that it is
only an appearance? It is a subordinate act or state of consciousness, it is a
self-oblivious identification with the modes of Nature in the limited workings
of this lower motivity and with this self-wrapped ego-bounded knot of action
of the mind, life and body. To rise above the modes of Nature, to be
\s{traigu\,ny\=at\=ita}, is indispensable, if we are to get back into our fully
conscious being away from the obsessing power of the lower action and to
put on the free nature of the spirit and its eternal immortality. That condition
of the \s{s\=adharmya} is what the Gita next proceeds to develop. It has
already alluded to it and laid it down with a brief emphasis in a previous
chapter; but it has now to indicate more precisely what are these modes,
these gunas, how they bind the soul and keep it back from spiritual freedom
and what is meant by rising above the modes of Nature.
\par The modes of Nature are all qualitative in their essence and are called
for that reason its gunas or qualities. In any spiritual conception of the
universe this must be so, because the connecting medium between spirit and
matter must be psyche or soul power and the primary action psychological
and qualitative, not physical and quantitative; for quality is the immaterial, the
more spiritual element in all the action of the universal Energy, her prior
dynamics. The predominance of physical Science has accustomed us to a
different view of Nature, because there the first thing that strikes us is the
importance of the quantitative aspect of her workings and her dependence
for the creation of forms on quantitative combinations and dispositions. And
yet even there the discovery that matter is rather substance or act of energy
than energy a motive power of self-existent material substance or an inherent
power acting in matter has led to some revival of an older reading of
universal Nature. The analysis of the ancient Indian thinkers allowed for the
quantitative action of Nature, \s{m\=atr\=a}; but that it regarded as proper to its
more objective and
Page 425

formally executive working, while the innately ideative executive power
which disposes things according to the quality of their being and energy,
\s{gu\,na}, \s{svabh\=ava}, is the primary determinant and underlies all the outer
quantitative dispositions. In the basis of the physical world this is not apparent
only because there the underlying ideative spirit, the Mahad Brahman, is
overlaid and hidden up by the movement of matter and material energy. But
even in the physical world the miraculous varying results of different
combinations and quantities of elements otherwise identical with each other
admits of no conceivable explanation if there is not a superior power of
variative quality of which these material dispositions are only the convenient
mechanical devices. Or let us say at once, there must be a secret ideative
capacity of the universal energy, \s{vij\~n\=ana},—even if we suppose that
energy and its instrumental idea, \s{buddhi}, to be themselves mechanical in
their nature,—which fixes the mathematics and decides the resultants of
these outer dispositions: it is the omnipotent Idea in the spirit which invents
and makes use of these devices. And in the vital and mental existence quality
at once openly appears as the primary power and amount of energy is only a
secondary factor. But in fact the mental, the vital, the physical existence are
all subject to the limitations of quality, all are governed by its determinations,
even though that truth seems more and more obscured as we descend the
scale of existence. Only the Spirit, which by the power of its idea-being and
its idea-force called \s{mahat} and \s{vij\~n\=ana} fixes these conditions, is not
so determined, not subject to any limitations either of quality or quantity
because its immeasurable and indeterminable infinity is superior to the modes
which it develops and uses for its creation.
\par But, again, the whole qualitative action of Nature, so infinitely intricate in
its detail and variety, is figured as cast into the mould of three general modes
of quality everywhere present, intertwined, almost inextricable, \s{sattva},
\s{rajas}, \s{tamas}. These modes are described in the Gita only by their
psychological action in man, or incidentally in things such as food according
as they produce a psychological or vital effect on human beings. If we look
for a more general definition, we shall perhaps catch a
Page 426

glimpse of it in the symbolic idea of Indian religion which attributes each of
these qualities respectively to one member of the cosmic Trinity, sattwa to
the preserver Vishnu, rajas to the creator Brahma, tamas to the destroyer
Rudra. Looking behind this idea for the rationale of the triple ascription, we
might define the three modes or qualities in terms of the motion of the
universal Energy as Nature's three concomitant and inseparable powers of
equilibrium, kinesis and inertia. But that is only their appearance in terms of
the external action of Force. It is otherwise if we regard consciousness and
force as twin terms of the one Existence, always coexistent in the reality of
being, however in the primal outward phenomenon of material Nature light of
consciousness may seem to disappear in a vast action of nescient unillumined
energy, while at an opposite pole of spiritual quiescence action of force may
seem to disappear in the stillness of the observing or witness consciousness.
These two conditions are the two extremes of an apparently separated
Purusha and Prakriti, but each at its extreme point does not abolish but at the
most only conceals its eternal mate in the depths of its own characteristic
way of being. Therefore, since consciousness is always there even in an
apparently inconscient Force, we must find a corresponding psychological
power of these three modes which informs their more outward executive
action. On their psychological side the three qualities may be defined, tamas
as Nature's power of nescience, rajas as her power of active seeking
ignorance enlightened by desire and impulsion, sattwa as her power of
possessing and harmonising knowledge.
\par The three qualitative modes of Nature are inextricably intertwined in all
cosmic existence. Tamas, the principle of inertia, is a passive and inert
nescience which suffers all shocks and contacts without any effort of
mastering response and by itself would lead to a disintegration of the whole
action of the energy and a radical dispersion of substance. But it is driven by
the kinetic power of rajas and even in the nescience of Matter is met and
embraced by an innate though unpossessed preserving principle of harmony
and balance and knowledge. Material energy appears to be tamasic in its
basic action, \s{ja\,da}, nescient,
Page 427

mechanic and in movement disintegrative. But it is dominated by a huge force
and impulsion of mute rajasic kinesis which drives it, even in and even by its
dispersion and disintegration, to build and create and again by a sattwic
ideative element in its apparently inconscient force which is always imposing
a harmony and preservative order on the two opposite tendencies. Rajas, the
principle of creative endeavour and motion and impulsion in Prakriti, kinesis,
\s{prav\,rtti}, so seen in Matter, appears more evidently as a conscious or
half-conscious passion of seeking and desire and action in the dominant
character of Life,—for that passion is the nature of all vital existence. And it
would lead by itself in its own nature to a persistent but always mutable and
unstable life and activity and creation without any settled result. But met on
one side by the disintegrating power of tamas with death and decay and
inertia, its ignorant action is on the other side of its functioning settled and
harmonised and sustained by the power of sattwa, subconscient in the lower
forms of life, more and more conscient in the emergence of mentality, most
conscious in the effort of the evolved intelligence figuring as will and reason
in the fully developed mental being. Sattwa, the principle of understanding
knowledge and of according assimilation, measure and equilibrium, which by
itself would lead only to some lasting concord of fixed and luminous
harmonies, is in the motions of this world impelled to follow the mutable strife
and action of the eternal kinesis and constantly overpowered or hedged in by
the forces of inertia and nescience. This is the appearance of a world
governed by the interlocked and mutually limited play of the three qualitative
modes of Nature.
\par The Gita applies this generalised analysis of the universal Energy to the
psychological nature of man in relation to his bondage to Prakriti and the
realisation of spiritual freedom. Sattwa, it tells us, is by the purity of its quality
a cause of light and illumination and by virtue of that purity it produces no
disease or morbidity or suffering in the nature. When into all the doors in the
body there comes a flooding of light, as if the doors and windows of a closed
house were opened to sunshine, a light of understanding, perception and
knowledge,
Page 428

—when the intelligence is alert and illumined, the senses quickened, the
whole mentality satisfied and full of brightness and the nervous being calmed
and filled with an illumined ease and clarity, \s{pras\=ada}, one should
understand that there has been a great increase and uprising of the sattwic
guna in the nature. For knowledge and a harmonious ease and pleasure and
happiness are the characteristic results of sattwa. The pleasure that is
sattwic is not only that contentment which an inner clarity of satisfied will and
intelligence brings with it, but all delight and content produced by the soul's
possession of itself in light or by an accord or an adequate and truthful
adjustment between the regarding soul and the surrounding Nature and her
offered objects of desire and perception.
\par Rajas, again, the Gita tells us, has for its essence attraction of liking and
longing. Rajas is a child of the attachment of the soul to the desire of objects;
it is born from the nature's thirst for an unpossessed satisfaction. It is
therefore full of unrest and fever and lust and greed and excitement, a thing
of seeking impulsions, and all this mounts in us when the middle guna
increases. It is the force of desire which motives all ordinary personal
initiative of action and all that movement of stir and seeking and propulsion in
our nature which is the impetus towards action and works, \s{prav\,rtti}.
Rajas, then, is evidently the kinetic force in the modes of Nature. Its fruit is
the lust of action, but also grief, pain, all kinds of suffering; for it has no right
possession of its object—desire in fact implies non-possession—and even its
pleasure of acquired possession is troubled and unstable because it has not
clear knowledge and does not know how to possess nor can it find the secret
of accord and right enjoyment. All the ignorant and passionate seeking of life
belongs to the rajasic mode of Nature.
\par Tamas, finally, is born of inertia and ignorance and its fruit too is inertia
and ignorance. It is the darkness of tamas which obscures knowledge and
causes all confusion and delusion. Therefore it is the opposite of sattwa, for
the essence of sattwa is enlightenment, \s{prak\=a\'sa}, and the essence of
tamas is absence of light, nescience, \s{aprak\=a\'sa}. But tamas brings
incapacity and
Page 429

negligence of action as well as the incapacity and negligence of error,
inattention and misunderstanding or non-understanding; indolence, languor
and sleep belong to this guna. Therefore it is the opposite too of rajas; for the
essence of rajas is movement and impulsion and kinesis, \s{prav\,rtti}, but the
essence of tamas is inertia, \s{aprav\,rtti}. Tamas is inertia of nescience and
inertia of inaction, a double negative.
\par These three qualities of Nature are evidently present and active in all
human beings and none can be said to be quite devoid of one and another or
free from any one of the three; none is cast in the mould of one guna to the
exclusion of the others. All men have in them in whatever degree the rajasic
impulse of desire and activity and the sattwic boon of light and happiness,
some balance, some adjustment of mind to itself and its surroundings and
objects, and all have their share of tamasic incapacity and ignorance or
nescience. But these qualities are not constant in any man in the quantitative
action of their force or in the combination of their elements; for they are
variable and in a continual state of mutual impact, displacement and
interaction. Now one leads, now another increases and predominates, and
each subjects us to its characteristic action and consequences. Only by a
general and ordinary predominance of one or other of the qualities can a man
be said to be either sattwic or rajasic or tamasic in his nature; but this can
only be a general and not an exclusive or absolute description. The three
qualities are a triple power which by their interaction determine the character
and disposition and through that and its various motions the actions of the
natural man. But this triple power is at the same time a triple cord of
bondage. “The three gunas born of Prakriti” says the Gita “bind in the body
the imperishable dweller in the body.” In a certain sense we can see at once
that there must be this bondage in following the action of the gunas; for they
are all limited by their finite of quality and operation and cause limitation.
Tamas is on both its sides an incapacity and therefore very obviously binds to
limitation. Rajasic desire as an initiator of action is a more positive power, but
still we can see well enough that desire with its limiting and engrossing hold
on man
Page 430

must always be a bondage. But how does sattwa, the power of knowledge
and happiness, become a chain? It so becomes because it is a principle of
mental nature, a principle of limited and limiting knowledge and of a
happiness which depends upon right following or attainment of this or that
object or else on particular states of the mentality, on a light of mind which
can be only a more or less clear twilight. Its pleasure can only be a passing
intensity or a qualified ease. Other is the infinite spiritual knowledge and the
free self-existent delight of our spiritual being.
\par But then there is the question, how does our infinite and imperishable
spirit, even involved in Nature, come thus to confine itself to the lower action
of Prakriti and undergo this bondage and how is it not, like the supreme spirit
of which it is a portion, free in its infinity even while enjoying the
self-limitations of its active evolution? The reason, says the Gita, is our
attachment to the gunas and to the result of their workings. Sattwa, it says,
attaches to happiness, rajas attaches to action, tamas covers up the
knowledge and attaches to negligence of error and inaction. Or again,
“sattwa binds by attachment to knowledge and attachment to happiness, rajas
binds the embodied spirit by attachment to works, tamas binds by negligence
and indolence and sleep.” In other words, the soul by attachment to the
enjoyment of the gunas and their results concentrates its consciousness on
the lower and outward action of life, mind and body in Nature, imprisons itself
in the form of these things and becomes oblivious of its own greater
consciousness behind in the spirit, unaware of the free power and scope of
the liberating Purusha. Evidently, in order to be liberated and perfect, we
must get back from these things, away from the gunas and above them and
return to the power of that free spiritual consciousness above Nature.
\par But this would seem to imply a cessation of all doing, since all natural
action is done by the gunas, by Nature through her modes. The soul cannot
act by itself, it can only act through Nature and her modes. And yet the Gita,
while it demands freedom from the modes, insists upon the necessity of
action. Here comes in the importance of its insistence on the abandonment
Page 431

of the fruits; for it is the desire of the fruits which is the most potent cause of
the soul's bondage and by abandoning it the soul can be free in action.
Ignorance is the result of tamasic action, pain the consequence of rajasic
works, pain of reaction, disappointment, dissatisfaction or transience, and
therefore in attachment to the fruits of this kind of activity attended as they
are with these undesirable accompaniments there is no profit. But of works
rightly done the fruit is pure and sattwic, the inner result is knowledge and
happiness. Yet attachment even to these pleasurable things must be entirely
abandoned, first, because in the mind they are limited and limiting forms and,
secondly, because, since sattwa is constantly entangled with and besieged by
rajas and tamas which may at any moment overcome it, there is a perpetual
insecurity in their tenure. But, even if one is free from any clinging to the
fruit, there may be an attachment to the work itself, either for its own sake,
the essential rajasic bond, or owing to a lax subjection to the drive of Nature,
the tamasic, or for the sake of the attracting rightness of the thing done,
which is the sattwic attaching cause powerful on the virtuous man or the man
of knowledge. And here evidently the resource is in that other injunction of
the Gita, to give up the action itself to the Lord of works and be only a
desireless and equal-minded instrument of his will. To see that the modes of
Nature are the whole agency and cause of our works and to know and turn
to that which is supreme above the gunas, is the way to rise above the lower
nature. Only so can we attain to the movement and status of the Divine,
\s{mad-bh\=ava}, by which free from subjection to birth and death and their
concomitants, decay, old age and suffering, the liberated soul shall enjoy in
the end immortality and all that is eternal.
\par But what, asks Arjuna, are the signs of such a man, what his action and
how is he said even in action to be above the three gunas? The sign, says
Krishna, is that equality of which I have so constantly spoken; the sign is that
inwardly he regards happiness and suffering alike, gold and mud and stone as
of equal value and that to him the pleasant and the unpleasant, praise and
blame, honour and insult, the faction of his friends
Page 432

and the faction of his enemies are equal things. He is steadfast in a wise
imperturbable and immutable inner calm and quietude. He initiates no action,
but leaves all works to be done by the gunas of Nature. Sattwa, rajas or
tamas may rise or cease in his outer mentality and his physical movements
with their results of enlightenment, of impulsion to works or of inaction and
the clouding over of the mental and nervous being, but he does not rejoice
when this comes or that ceases, nor on the other hand does he abhor or
shrink from the operation or the cessation of these things. He has seated
himself in the conscious light of another principle than the nature of the gunas
and that greater consciousness remains steadfast in him, above these powers
and unshaken by their motions like the sun above clouds to one who has risen
into a higher atmosphere. He from that height sees that it is the gunas that
are in process of action and that their storm and calm are not himself but only
a movement of Prakriti; his self is immovable above and his spirit does not
participate in that shifting mutability of things unstable. This is the
impersonality of the Brahmic status; for that higher principle, that greater
wide high-seated consciousness, \s{k\=u\,tastha}, is the immutable Brahman.
\par But still there is evidently here a double status, there is a scission of the
being between two opposites; a liberated spirit in the immutable Self or
Brahman watches the action of an unliberated mutable Nature,—Akshara
and Kshara. Is there no greater status, no principle of more absolute
perfection, or is this division the highest consciousness possible in the body,
and is the end of Yoga to drop the mutable nature and the gunas born of the
embodiment in Nature and disappear into the impersonality and everlasting
peace of the Brahman? Is that \s{laya} or dissolution of the individual
Purusha the greatest liberation? There is, it would seem, something else; for
the Gita says at the close, always returning to this one final note, “He also
who loves and strives after Me with an undeviating love and adoration,
passes beyond the three gunas and he too is prepared for becoming the
Brahman.” This “I” is the Purushottama who is the foundation of the silent
Brahman and of immortality and imperishable spiritual existence and of the
eternal dharma and
Page 433

of an utter bliss of happiness. There is a status then which is greater than the
peace of the Akshara as it watches unmoved the strife of the gunas. There is
a highest spiritual experience and foundation above the immutability of the
Brahman, there is an eternal dharma greater than the rajasic impulsion to
works, \s{prav\,rtti}, there is an absolute delight which is untouched by rajasic
suffering and beyond the sattwic happiness, and these things are found and
possessed by dwelling in the being and power of the Purushottama. But since
it is acquired by bhakti, its status must be that divine delight, Ananda, in which
is experienced the union of utter love
\note{\s{nirati\'sayaprem\=aspadatvam \=anandatattvam}.} and possessing
oneness, the crown of bhakti. And to rise into that Ananda, into that
imperishable oneness must be the completion of spiritual perfection and the
fulfilment of the eternal immortalising dharma.
Page 434

\par
\HN XV
\par
\ht The Three Purushas
\note{Gita, XV.}
\par\drop The doctrine of the Gita from the beginning to the end converges on
all its lines and through all the flexibility of its turns towards one central
thought, and to that it is arriving in all its balancing and reconciliation of the
disagreements of various philosophic systems and its careful synthetising of
the truths of spiritual experience, lights often conflicting or at least divergent
when taken separately and exclusively pursued along their outer arc and
curve of radiation, but here brought together into one focus of grouping
vision. This central thought is the idea of a triple consciousness, three and yet
one, present in the whole scale of existence.
\par There is a spirit here at work in the world that is one in innumerable
appearances. It is the developer of birth and action, the moving power of life,
the inhabiting and associating consciousness in the myriad mutabilities of
Nature; it is the constituting reality of all this stir in Time and Space; it is itself
Time and Space and Circumstance. It is this multitude of souls in the worlds;
it is the gods and men and creatures and things and forces and qualities and
quantities and powers and presences. It is Nature, which is power of the
Spirit, and objects, which are its phenomena of name and idea and form, and
existences, who are portions and births and becomings of this single
self-existent spiritual entity, the One, the Eternal. But what we see obviously
at work before us is not this Eternal and his conscious Shakti, but a Nature
which in the blind stress of her operations is ignorant of the spirit within her
action. Her work is a confused, ignorant and limiting play of certain
fundamental modes, qualities, principles of force in mechanical operation and
the fixity or the flux of their consequences. And whatever soul comes to the
Page 435

surface in her action, is itself in appearance ignorant, suffering, bound to the
incomplete and unsatisfying play of this inferior Nature. The inherent Power
in her is yet other than what it thus seems to be; for, hidden in its truth,
manifest in its appearances, it is the Kshara, the universal Soul, the spirit in
the mutability of cosmic phenomenon and becoming, one with the Immutable
and the Supreme. We have to arrive at the hidden truth behind its manifest
appearances; we have to discover the Spirit behind these veils and to see all
as the One, \s{v\=asudeva\,h sarvam iti}, individual, universal, transcendent. But
this is a thing impossible to achieve with any completeness of inner reality, so
long as we live concentrated in the inferior Nature. For in this lesser
movement Nature is an ignorance, a Maya; she shelters the Divine within its
folds and conceals him from herself and her creatures. The Godhead is
hidden by the Maya of his own all-creating Yoga, the Eternal figured in
transience, Being absorbed and covered up by its own manifesting
phenomena. In the Kshara taken alone as a thing in itself, the mutable
universal apart from the undivided Immutable and the Transcendent, there is
no completeness of knowledge, no completeness of our being and therefore
no liberation.
\par But then there is another spirit of whom we become aware and who is
none of these things, but self and self only. This Spirit is eternal, always the
same, never changed or affected by manifestation, the one, the stable, a
self-existence undivided and not even seemingly divided by the division of
things and powers in Nature, inactive in her action, immobile in her motion. It
is the Self of all and yet unmoved, indifferent, intangible, as if all these things
which depend upon it were not-self, not its own results and powers and
consequences, but a drama of action developed before the eye of an
unmoved unparticipating spectator. For the mind that stages and shares in the
drama is other than the Self which indifferently contains the action. This spirit
is timeless, though we see it in Time; it is unextended in space, though we see
it as if pervading space. We become aware of it in proportion as we draw
back from out inward, or look behind the action and motion for something that
is eternal and stable, or get away from time and its creation to the uncreated,
away from phenomenon
Page 436

to being, from the personal to impersonality, from becoming to unalterable
self-existence. This is the Akshara, the immutable in the mutable, the
immobile in the mobile, the imperishable in things perishable. Or rather, since
there is only an appearance of pervasion, it is the immutable, immobile and
imperishable in which proceeds all the mobility of mutable and perishable
things.
\par The Kshara spirit visible to us as all natural existence and the totality of
all existences moves and acts pervadingly in the immobile and eternal
Akshara. This mobile Power of Self acts in that fundamental stability of Self,
as the second principle of material Nature, Vayu, with its contactual force of
aggregation and separation, attraction and repulsion, supporting the formative
force of the fiery (radiant, gaseous and electric) and other elemental
movements, ranges pervadingly in the subtly massive stability of ether. This
Akshara is the self higher than the buddhi—it exceeds even that highest
subjective principle of Nature in our being, the liberating intelligence, through
which man returning beyond his restless mobile mental to his calm eternal
spiritual self is at last free from the persistence of birth and the long chain of
action, of Karma. This self in its highest status, \s{para\.m dh\=ama}, is an
unmanifest beyond even the unmanifest principle of the original cosmic
Prakriti, Avyakta, and, if the soul turns to this Immutable, the hold of cosmos
and Nature falls away from it and it passes beyond birth to an unchanging
eternal existence. These two then are the two spirits we see in the world;
one emerges in front in its action, the other remains behind it steadfast in that
perpetual silence from which the action comes and in which all actions cease
and disappear into timeless being, Nirvana. \s{Dv\=av imau} \s{puru\,sau loke
k\,sara\'s c\=ak\,sara eva ca}.
\par The difficulty which baffles our intelligence is that these two seem to be
irreconcilable opposites with no real nexus between them or any transition
from the one to the other except by an intolerant movement of separation.
The Kshara acts, or at least motives action, separately in the Akshara; the
Akshara stands apart, self-centred, separate in its inactivity from the Kshara.
At first sight it would almost seem better, more logical, more easy
Page 437

of comprehension, if we admitted with the Sankhyas an original and eternal
duality of Purusha and Prakriti, if not even an eternal plurality of souls. Our
experience of the Akshara would then be simply the withdrawal of each
Purusha into himself, his turning away from Nature and therefore from all
contact with other souls in the relations of existence; for each is
self-sufficient and infinite and complete in his own essence. But after all the
final experience is that of a unity of all beings which is not merely a
community of experience, a common subjection to one force of Nature, but a
oneness in the spirit, a vast identity of conscious being beyond all this endless
variety of determination, behind all this apparent separativism of relative
existence. The Gita takes its stand in that highest spiritual experience. It
appears indeed to admit an eternal plurality of souls subject to and sustained
by their eternal unity, for cosmos is for ever and manifestation goes on in
unending cycles; nor does it affirm anywhere or use any expression that
would indicate an absolute disappearance, \s{laya}, the annullation of the
individual soul in the Infinite. But at the same time it affirms with a strong
insistence that the Akshara is the one self of all these many souls, and it is
therefore evident that these two spirits are a dual status of one eternal and
universal existence. That is a very ancient doctrine; it is the whole basis of
the largest vision of the Upanishads,—as when the Isha tells us that Brahman
is both the mobile and the immobile, is the One and the Many, is the Self and
all existences, \s{\=atman}, \s{sarvabh\=ut\=ani}, is the Knowledge and the
Ignorance, is the eternal unborn status and also the birth of existences, and
that to dwell only on one of these things to the rejection of its eternal
counterpart is a darkness of exclusive knowledge or a darkness of ignorance.
It too insists like the Gita that man must know and must embrace both and
learn of the Supreme in his entirety—\s{samagra\.m m\=am}, as the Gita puts
it—in order to enjoy immortality and live in the Eternal. The teaching of the
Gita and this side of the teaching of the Upanishads are so far at one; for
they look at and admit both sides of the reality and still arrive at identity as
the conclusion and the highest truth of existence.
\par But this greater knowledge and experience, however true
Page 438

and however powerful in its appeal to our highest seeing, has still to get rid of
a very real and pressing difficulty, a practical as well as a logical
contradiction which seems at first sight to persist \LNOTES up to the highest
heights of spiritual experience. The Eternal is other than this mobile
subjective and objective experience, there is a greater consciousness, \s{na}
\s{ida\.m yad up\=asate}:
\note{{\it Kena Upanishad}.} and yet at the same time all this is the Eternal,
all this is the perennial self-seeing of the Self, \s{sarva\.m khalu ida\.m
brahma},
\note{{\it Chhandogya Upanishad}: Verily all this that is is the Brahman.}
\s{ayam \=atm\=a brahma}.
\note{{\it Mandukya Upanishad}: The Self is the Brahman.} The Eternal has
become all existences, \s{\=atm\=a abh\=ut} \s{sarv\=a\,ni bh\=ut\=ani};
\note{{\it Isha Upanishad}.} as the Swetaswatara puts it, “Thou art this boy
and yonder girl and that old man walking supported on his staff,”—even as in
the Gita the Divine says that he is Krishna and Arjuna and Vyasa and
Ushanas, and the lion and the aswattha tree, and consciousness and
intelligence and all qualities and the self of all creatures. But how are these
two the same, when they seem not only so opposite in nature, but so difficult
to unify in experience? For when we live in the mobility of the becoming, we
may be aware of but hardly live in the immortality of timeless self-existence.
And when we fix ourselves in timeless being, Time and Space and
circumstance fall away from us and begin to appear as a troubled dream in
the Infinite. The most persuasive conclusion would be, at first sight, that the
mobility of the spirit in Nature is an illusion, a thing real only when we live in
it, but not real in essence, and that is why, when we go back into self, it falls
away from our incorruptible essence. That is the familiar cutting of the knot
of the riddle, \s{brahma satya\.m jagan mithy\=a}.
\par The Gita does not take refuge in this explanation which has enormous
difficulties of its own, besides its failure to account for the illusion,—for it
only says that it is all a mysterious and incomprehensible Maya, and then we
might just as well say that it is all a mysterious and incomprehensible double
reality, spirit concealing itself from spirit. The Gita speaks of Maya, but only
as a bewildering partial consciousness which loses hold of the
Page 439

complete reality, lives in the phenomenon of mobile Nature and has no sight
of the Spirit of which she is the active Power, \s{me prak\,rti\,h}. When we
transcend this Maya, the world does not disappear, it only changes its whole
heart of meaning. In the spiritual vision we find not that all this does not really
exist, but rather that all is, but with a sense quite other than its present
mistaken significance: all is self and soul and nature of the Godhead, all is
Vasudeva. The world for the Gita is real, a creation of the Lord, a power of
the Eternal, a manifestation from the Parabrahman, and even this lower
nature of the triple Maya is a derivation from the supreme divine Nature. Nor
can we take refuge altogether in this distinction that there is a double, an
inferior active and temporal and a superior calm, still and eternal reality
beyond action and that our liberation is to pass from this partiality to that
greatness, from the action to the silence. For the Gita insists that we can and
should, while we live, be conscious in the self and its silence and yet act with
power in the world of Nature. And it gives the example of the Divine himself
who is not bound by necessity of birth, but free, superior to the cosmos, and
yet abides eternally in action, \s{varta eva ca karma\,ni}. Therefore it is by
putting on a likeness of the divine nature in its completeness that the unity of
this double experience becomes entirely possible. But what is the principle of
that oneness?
\par The Gita finds it in its supreme vision of the Purushottama; for that is the
type, according to its doctrine, of the complete and the highest experience, it
is the knowledge of the whole-knowers, \s{k\,rtsnavida\,h}. The Akshara is
\s{para}, supreme in relation to the elements and action of cosmic Nature. It
is the immutable Self of all, and the immutable Self of all is the Purushottama.
The Akshara is he in the freedom of his self-existence unaffected by the
action of his own power in Nature, not impinged on by the urge of his own
becoming, undisturbed by the play of his own qualities. But this is only one
aspect though a great aspect of the integral knowledge. The Purushottama is
at the same time greater than the Akshara, because he is more than this
immutability and he is not limited even by the highest eternal status of his
being, \s{para\.m}
Page 440

\s{dh\=ama}. Still, it is through whatever is immutable and eternal in us that we
arrive at that highest status from which there is no returning to birth, and that
was the liberation which was sought by the wise of old, the ancient sages.
But when pursued through the Akshara alone, this attempt at liberation
becomes the seeking of the Indefinable, a thing hard for our nature embodied
as we are here in Matter. The Indefinable, to which the Akshara, the pure
intangible self here in us rises in its separative urge, is some supreme
Unmanifest, \s{paro} \s{avyakta\,h}, and that highest unmanifest Akshara is
still the Purushottama. Therefore, the Gita has said, those also who follow
after the Indefinable, come to me, the eternal Godhead. But yet is he more
even than a highest unmanifest Akshara, more than any negative Absolute,
\s{neti neti}, because he is to be known also as the supreme Purusha who
extends this whole universe in his own existence. He is a supreme mysterious
All, an ineffable positive Absolute of all things here. He is the Lord in the
Kshara, Purushottama not only there, but here in the heart of every creature,
Ishwara. And there too even in his highest eternal status, \s{paro}
\s{avyakta\,h}, he is the supreme Lord, Parameshwara, no aloof and unrelated
Indefinable, but the origin and father and mother and first foundation and
eternal abode of self and cosmos and Master of all existences and enjoyer of
askesis and sacrifice. It is by knowing him at once in the Akshara and the
Kshara, it is by knowing him as the Unborn who partially manifests himself in
all birth and even himself descends as the constant Avatar, it is by knowing
him in his entirety, \s{samagra\.m m\=am}, that the soul is easily released from
the appearances of the lower Nature and returns by a vast sudden growth
and broad immeasurable ascension into the divine being and supreme Nature.
For the truth of the Kshara too is a truth of the Purushottama. The
Purushottama is in the heart of every creature and is manifested in his
countless Vibhutis; the Purushottama is the cosmic spirit in Time and it is he
that gives the command to the divine action of the liberated human spirit. He
is both Akshara and Kshara, and yet he is other because he is more and
greater than either of these opposites. \s{Uttama\,h puru\,sas tvanya\,h
param\=atmetyud\=ah\,rta\,h}, \s{yo lokatrayam \=avi\'sya}
Page 441

\s{bibhartyavyaya \=i\'svara\,h}, “But other than these two is that highest spirit
called the supreme Self, who enters the three worlds and upbears them, the
imperishable Lord.” This verse is the keyword of the Gita's reconciliation of
these two apparently opposite aspects of our existence.
\par The idea of the Purushottama has been prepared, alluded to,
adumbrated, assumed even from the beginning, but it is only now in the
fifteenth chapter that it is expressly stated and the distinction illuminated by a
name. And it is instructive to see how it is immediately approached and
developed. To ascend into the divine nature, we have been told, one must
first fix oneself in a perfect spiritual equality and rise above the lower nature
of the three gunas. Thus transcending the lower Prakriti we fix ourselves in
the impersonality, the imperturbable superiority to all action, the purity from
all definition and limitation by quality which is one side of the manifested
nature of the Purushottama, his manifestation as the eternity and unity of the
self, the Akshara. But there is also an ineffable eternal multiplicity of the
Purushottama, a highest truest truth behind the primal mystery of soul
manifestation. The Infinite has an eternal power, an unbeginning and
unending action of his divine Nature, and in that action the miracle of soul
personality emerges from a play of apparently impersonal forces, \s{prak\,rtir
j\=ivabh\=ut\=a}. This is possible because personality too is a character of the
Divine and finds in the Infinite its highest spiritual truth and meaning. But the
Person in the Infinite is not the egoistic, separative, oblivious personality of
the lower Prakriti; it is something exalted, universal and transcendent,
immortal and divine. That mystery of the supreme Person is the secret of
love and devotion. The spiritual person, \s{puru\,sa}, the eternal soul in us
offers itself and all it has and is to the eternal Divine, the supreme Person and
Godhead of whom it is a portion, \s{a\.m\'sa}. The completeness of knowledge
finds itself in this self-offering, this uplifting of our personal nature by love
and adoration to the ineffable Master of our personality and its acts; the
sacrifice of works receives by it its consummation and perfect sanction. It is
then through these things that the soul of man fulfils itself most completely
Page 442

in this other and dynamic secret, this other great and intimate aspect of the
divine nature and possesses by that fulfilment the foundation of immortality,
the supreme felicity and the eternal Dharma. And having so stated this
double requisite, equality in the one self, adoration of the one Lord, at first
separately as if they were two different ways of arriving at the Brahmic
status, \s{brahmabh\=uy\=aya},—one taking the form of quietistic \s{sanny\=asa},
the other a form of divine love and divine action,—the Gita proceeds now to
unite the personal and the impersonal in the Purushottama and to define their
relations. For the object of the Gita is to get rid of exclusions and separative
exaggerations and fuse these two sides of knowledge and spiritual experience
into a single and perfect way to the supreme perfection.
\par First there comes a description of cosmic existence in the Vedantic
image of the aswattha tree. This tree of cosmic existence has no beginning
and no end, \s{n\=anto na c\=adi\,h}, in space or in time; for it is eternal and
imperishable, \s{avyaya}. The real form of it cannot be perceived by us in
this material world of man's embodiment, nor has it any apparent lasting
foundation here; it is an infinite movement and its foundation is above in the
supreme of the Infinite. Its principle is the ancient sempiternal urge to action,
\s{prav\,rtti}, which for ever proceeds without beginning or end from the
original Soul of all existence, \s{\=adya\.m puru\,sa\.m yata\,h prav\,rtti\,h pras\,rt\=a
pur\=a\,n\=i}. Therefore its original source is above, beyond Time in the Eternal,
but its branches stretch down below and it extends and plunges its other
roots, well-fixed and clinging roots of attachment and desire with their
consequences of more and more desire and an endlessly developing action,
plunges them downward here into the world of men. The hymns of the Veda
are compared to its leaves and the man who knows this tree of the cosmos is
the Veda-knower. And here we see the sense of that rather disparaging view
of the Veda or at least of the Vedavada, which we had to notice at the
beginning. For the knowledge the Veda gives us is a knowledge of the gods,
of the principles and powers of the cosmos, and its fruits are the fruits of a
sacrifice which is offered with desire, fruits of enjoyment and lordship in the
nature of the three worlds, in earth and
Page 443

heaven and the world between earth and heaven. The branches of this
cosmic tree extend both below and above, below in the material, above in the
supraphysical planes; they grow by the gunas of Nature, for the triple guna is
all the subject of the Vedas, \s{traigu\,nya-vi\,say\=a ved\=a\,h}. The Vedic rhythms,
\s{chand\=a\.msi}, are the leaves and the sensible objects of desire supremely
gained by a right doing of sacrifice are the constant budding of the foliage.
Man, therefore, so long as he enjoys the play of the gunas and is attached to
desire, is held in the coils of Pravritti, in the movement of birth and action,
turns about constantly between the earth and the middle planes and the
heavens and is unable to get back to his supreme spiritual infinitudes. This
was perceived by the sages. To achieve liberation they followed the path of
Nivritti or cessation from the original urge to action, and the consummation of
this way is the cessation of birth itself and a transcendent status in the highest
supracosmic reach of the Eternal. But for this purpose it is necessary to cut
these long-fixed roots of desire by the strong sword of detachment and then
to seek for that highest goal whence, once having reached it, there is no
compulsion of return to mortal life. To be free from the bewilderment of this
lower Maya, without egoism, the great fault of attachment conquered, all
desires stilled, the duality of joy and grief cast away, always to be fixed in
wide equality, always to be firm in a pure spiritual consciousness, these are
the steps of the way to that supreme Infinite. There we find the timeless
being which is not illumined by sun or moon or fire, but is itself the light of the
presence of the eternal Purusha. I turn away, says the Vedantic verse, to
seek that original Soul alone and to reach him in the great passage. That is
the highest status of the Purushottama, his supracosmic existence.
\par But it would seem that this can be attained very well, best even,
pre-eminently, directly, by the quiescence of Sannyasa. Its appointed path
would seem to be the way of the Akshara, a complete renunciation of works
and life, an ascetic seclusion, an ascetic inaction. Where is the room here, or
at least where is the call, the necessity, for the command to action, and what
has all this to do with the maintenance of the cosmic existence,
Page 444

\s{lokasa\.ngraha}, the slaughter of Kurukshetra, the ways of the Spirit in
Time, the vision of the million-bodied Lord and his high-voiced bidding,
“Arise, slay the foe, enjoy a wealthy kingdom”? And what then is this soul in
Nature? This spirit too, this Kshara, this enjoyer of our mutable existence, is
the Purushottama; it is he in his eternal multiplicity, that is the Gita's answer.
“It is an eternal portion of me that becomes the Jiva in a world of Jivas.” This
is an epithet, a statement of immense bearing and consequence. For it means
that each soul, each being in its spiritual reality is the very Divine, however
partial its actual manifestation of him in Nature. And it means too, if words
have any sense, that each manifesting spirit, each of the many, is an eternal
individual, an eternal unborn and undying power of the one Existence. We
call this manifesting spirit the Jiva, because it appears here as if a living
creature in a world of living creatures, and we speak of this spirit in man as
the human soul and think of it in the terms of humanity only. But in truth it is
something greater than its present appearance and not bound to its humanity:
it was a lesser manifestation than the human in its past, it can become
something much greater than mental man in its future. And when this soul
rises above all ignorant limitation, then it puts on its divine nature of which its
humanity is only a temporary veil, a thing of partial and incomplete
significance. The individual spirit exists and ever existed beyond in the
Eternal, for it is itself everlasting, \s{san\=atana}. It is evidently this idea of the
eternal individual which leads the Gita to avoid any expression at all
suggestive of a complete dissolution, \s{laya}, and to speak rather of the
highest state of the soul as a dwelling in the Purushottama, \s{nivasi\,syasi
mayyeva}. If when speaking of the one Self of all it seems to use the
language of Adwaita, yet this enduring truth of the eternal individual,
\s{mam\=a\.m\'sa\,h san\=atana\,h}, adds something which brings in a qualification and
appears almost to accept the seeing of the Visishtadwaita,—though we must
not therefore leap at once to the conclusion that that alone is the Gita's
philosophy or that its doctrine is identical with the later doctrine of Ramanuja.
Still this much is clear that there is an eternal, a real and not only an illusive
Page 445

principle of multiplicity in the spiritual being of the one divine Existence.
\par This eternal individual is not other than or in any way really separate
from the Divine Purusha. It is the Lord himself, the Ishwara who by virtue of
the eternal multiplicity of his oneness—is not all existence a rendering of that
truth of the Infinite?—exists for ever as the immortal soul within us and has
taken up this body and goes forth from the transient framework when it is
cast away to disappear into the elements of Nature. He brings in with him
and cultivates for the enjoyment of the objects of mind and sense the
subjective powers of Prakriti, mind and the five senses, and in his going forth
too he goes taking them as the wind takes the perfumes from a vase. But the
identity of the Lord and the soul in mutable Nature is hidden from us by
outward appearance and lost in the crowding mobile deceptions of that
Nature. And those who allow themselves to be governed by the figures of
Nature, the figure of humanity or any other form, will never see it, but will
ignore and despise the Divine lodged in the human body. Their ignorance
cannot perceive him in his coming in and his going forth or in his staying and
enjoying and assumption of quality, but sees only what is there visible to the
mind and senses, not the greater truth which can only be glimpsed by the eye
of knowledge. Never can they have sight of him, even if they strive to do so,
until they learn to put away the limitations of the outward consciousness and
build in themselves their spiritual being, create for it, as it were, a form in
their nature. Man, to know himself, must be \s{k\,rt\=atm\=a}, formed and
complete in the spiritual mould, enlightened in the spiritual vision. The Yogins
who have this eye of knowledge, see the Divine Being we are in their own
endless reality, their own eternity of spirit. Illumined, they see the Lord in
themselves and are delivered from the crude material limitation, from the
form of mental personality, from the transient life formulation: they dwell
immortal in the truth of the self and spirit. But they see him too not only in
themselves, but in all the cosmos. In the light of the sun that illumines all this
world they witness the light of the Godhead which is in us; the light in the
moon and in fire is
Page 446

the light of the Divine. It is the Divine who has entered into this form of earth
and is the spirit of its material force and sustains by his might these
multitudes. The Divine is the godhead of Soma who by the \s{rasa}, the sap
in the Earth-mother, nourishes the plants and trees that clothe her surface.
The Divine and no other is the flame of life that sustains the physical body of
living creatures and turns its food into sustenance of their vital force. He is
lodged in the heart of every breathing thing; from him are memory and
knowledge and the debates of the reason. He is that which is known by all
the Vedas and by all forms of knowing; he is the knower of Veda and the
maker of Vedanta. In other words, the Divine is at once the Soul of matter
and the Soul of life and the Soul of mind as well as the Soul of the
supramental light that is beyond mind and its limited reasoning intelligence.
\par Thus the Divine is manifest in a double soul of his mystery, a twofold
power, \s{dv\=av imau} \s{puru\,sau}; he supports at once the spirit of mutable
things that is all these existences, \s{k\,sara\,h sarv\=a\,ni bh\=ut\=ani}, and the
immutable spirit that stands above them in his imperturbable immobility of
eternal silence and calm. And it is by the force of the Divine in them that the
mind and heart and will of man are so powerfully drawn in different
directions by these two spirits as if by opposing and incompatible attractions
one insistent to annul the other. But the Divine is neither wholly the Kshara,
nor wholly the Akshara. He is greater than the immutable Self and he is
much greater than the Soul of mutable things. If he is capable of being both
at once, it is because he is other than they, \s{anya\,h}, the Purushottama
above all cosmos and yet extended in the world and extended in the Veda, in
self-knowledge and in cosmic experience. And whoever thus knows and sees
him as the Purushottama, is no longer bewildered whether by the
world-appearance or by the separate attraction of these two apparent
contraries. These at first confront each other here in him as a positive of the
cosmic action and as its negative in the Self who has no part in an action that
belongs or seems to belong entirely to the ignorance of Nature. Or again they
challenge his consciousness as
Page 447

a positive of pure, indeterminable, stable, eternal self-existence and as its
negative of a world of elusive determinations and relations, ideas and forms,
perpetual unstable becoming and the creating and uncreating tangle of action
and evolution, birth and death, appearance and disappearance. He embraces
and escapes them, overcomes their opposition and becomes all-knowing,
\s{sarvavid}, a whole-knower. He sees the entire sense both of the self and
of things; he restores the integral reality of the Divine;
\note{\s{samagra\.m m\=am}.} he unites the Kshara and the Akshara in the
Purushottama. He loves, worships, cleaves to and adores the supreme Self of
his and all existence, the one Lord of his and all energies, the close and
far-off Eternal in and beyond the world. And he does this too with no single
side or portion of himself, exclusive spiritualised mind, blinding light of the
heart intense but divorced from largeness, or sole aspiration of the will in
works, but in all the perfectly illumined ways of his being and his becoming,
his soul and his nature. Divine in the equality of his imperturbable
self-existence, one in it with all objects and creatures, he brings that
boundless equality, that deep oneness down into his mind and heart and life
and body and founds on it in an indivisible integrality the trinity of divine love,
divine works and divine knowledge. This is the Gita's way of salvation.
\par And is that not too after all the real Adwaita which makes no least
scission in the one eternal Existence? This utmost undividing Monism sees
the one as the one even in the multiplicities of Nature, in all aspects, as much
in the reality of self and of cosmos as in that greatest reality of the
supracosmic which is the source of self and the truth of the cosmos and is
not bound either by any affirmation of universal becoming or by any universal
or absolute negation. That at least is the Adwaita of the Gita. This is the most
secret Shastra, says the Teacher to Arjuna; this is the supreme teaching and
science which leads us into the heart of the highest mystery of existence.
Absolutely to know it, to seize it in knowledge and feeling and force and
experience is
Page 448

to be perfected in the transformed understanding, divinely satisfied in heart
and successful in the supreme sense and objective of all will and action and
works. It is the way to be immortal, to rise towards the highest divine nature
and to assume the eternal Dharma.
Page 449

\par
\HN XVI
\par
\ht The Fullness of Spiritual Action
\par\drop The development of the idea of the Gita has reached a point at
which one question alone remains for solution,—the question of our nature
bound and defective and how it is to effect, not only in principle but in all its
movements, its evolution from the lower to the higher being and from the law
of its present action to the immortal Dharma. The difficulty is one which is
implied in certain of the positions laid down in the Gita, but has to be brought
out into greater prominence than it gets there and to be put into a clearer
shape before our intelligence. The Gita proceeded on a psychological
knowledge which was familiar to the mind of the time, and in the steps of its
thought it was well able to abridge its transitions, to take much for granted
and to leave many things unexpressed which we need to have put strongly
into light and made precise to us. Its teaching sets out at the beginning to
propose a new source and level for our action in the world; that was the
starting-point and that motives also the conclusion. Its initial object was not
precisely to propose a way of liberation, \s{mok\,sa}, but rather to show the
compatibility of works with the soul's effort towards liberation and of spiritual
freedom itself when once attained with continued action in the world,
\s{muktasya karma}. Incidentally, a synthetic Yoga or psychological method
of arriving at spiritual liberation and perfection has been developed and
certain metaphysical affirmations have been put forward, certain truths of our
being and nature on which the validity of this Yoga reposes. But the original
preoccupation remains throughout, the original difficulty and problem, how
Arjuna, dislodged by a strong revulsion of thought and feeling from the
established natural and rational foundations and standards of action, is to find
a new and satisfying spiritual norm of works, or how he is to live in the truth
of the Spirit—since he can
Page 450

no longer act according to the partial truths of the customary reason and
nature of man—and yet to do his appointed work on the battle-field of
Kurukshetra. To live inwardly calm, detached, silent in the silence of the
impersonal and universal Self and yet do dynamically the works of dynamic
Nature, and more largely, to be one with the Eternal within us and to do all
the will of the Eternal in the world expressed through a sublimated force, a
divine height of the personal nature uplifted, liberated, universalised, made
one with God-nature,—this is the Gita's solution.
\par Let us see what this comes to in the most plain and positive terms and
from the standpoint of the problem which is at the root of Arjuna's difficulty
and refusal. His duty as a human being and a social being is the discharge of
the high function of the Kshatriya without which the frame of society cannot
be maintained, the ideals of the race cannot be vindicated, the harmonious
order of right and justice cannot be upheld against the anarchic violence of
oppression, wrong and injustice. And yet the appeal to duty by itself can no
longer satisfy the protagonist of the struggle because in the terrible actuality
of Kurukshetra it presents itself in harsh, perplexed and ambiguous terms.
The discharge of his social duty has suddenly come to signify assent to an
enormous result of sin and sorrow and suffering; the customary means of
maintaining social order and justice is found to lead instead to a great disorder
and chaos. The rule of just claim and interest, that which we call rights, will
not serve him here; for the kingdom he has to win for himself and his
brothers and his side in the war is indeed rightly theirs and its assertion an
overthrow of Asuric tyranny and a vindication of justice, but a
blood-bespattered justice and a kingdom possessed in sorrow and with the
stain on it of a great sin, a monstrous harm done to society, a veritable crime
against the race. Nor will the rule of Dharma, of ethical right, serve any
better; for there is here a conflict of dharmas. A new and greater yet
unguessed rule is needed to solve the problem, but what is that rule?
\par For to withdraw from his work, to take refuge in a saintly inactivity and
leave the imperfect world with its unsatisfying
Page 451

methods and motives to take care of itself is one possible solution easy to
envisage, easy to execute, but this is the very cutting of the knot that has
been insistently forbidden by the Teacher. Action is demanded of man by the
Master of the world who is the master of all his works and whose world is a
field of action, whether done through the ego and in the ignorance or partial
light of the limited human reason or initiated from a higher and more largely
seeing plane of vision and motive. Again, to abandon this particular action as
evil would be another kind of solution, the ready resort of the shortsighted
moralising mind, but to this evasion too the Teacher refuses his assent.
Arjuna's abstention would work a much greater sin and evil: it would mean, if
it had any effect at all, the triumph of wrong and injustice and the rejection of
his own mission as an instrument of the divine workings. A violent crisis in
the destinies of the race has been brought about not by any blind motion of
forces or solely by the confused clash of human ideas, interests, passions,
egoisms, but by a Will which is behind these outward appearances. This truth
Arjuna must be brought to see; he must learn to act impersonally,
imperturbably as the instrument not of his little personal desires and weak
human shrinkings, but of a vaster and more luminous Power, a greater
all-wise divine and universal Will. He must act impersonally and universally in
a high union of his soul with the inner and outer Godhead, \s{yukta}, in a
calm Yoga with his own supreme Self and the informing Self of the universe.
\par But this truth cannot be rightly seen and this kind of action cannot be
rightly undertaken, cannot become real as long as man is governed by the
ego, even by the half-enlightened unillumined sattwic ego of the reason and
the mental intelligence. For this is a truth of the spirit, this is an action from a
spiritual basis. A spiritual, not an intellectual knowledge is the indispensable
requisite for this way of works, its sole possible light, medium, incentive. First,
therefore, the Teacher points out that all these ideas and feelings which
trouble, perplex and baffle Arjuna, joy and sorrow, desire and sin, the mind's
turn towards governing action by the outward results of action, the human
shrinking from what seems terrible and formidable in the dealings of the
Page 452

universal Spirit with the world, are things born of the subjection of our
consciousness to a natural ignorance, the way of working of a lower nature in
which the soul is involved and sees itself as a separate ego returning to the
action of things upon it dual reactions of pain and pleasure, virtue and vice,
right and wrong, good happening and evil fortune. These reactions create a
tangled web of perplexity in which the soul is lost and bewildered by its own
ignorance; it has to guide itself by partial and imperfect solutions that serve
ordinarily with a stumbling sufficiency in the normal life, but fail when brought
to the test of a wider seeing and a profounder experience. To understand the
real sense of action and existence one must retreat behind all these
appearances into the truth of the spirit; one must found self-knowledge
before one can have the basis of a right world-knowledge.
\par The first requisite is to shake the wings of the soul free from desire and
passion and troubling emotion and all this perturbed and distorting atmosphere
of human mind and arrive into an ether of dispassionate equality, a heaven of
impersonal calm, an egoless feeling and vision of things. For only in that lucid
upper air, reaches free from all storm and cloud, can self-knowledge come
and the law of the world and the truth of Nature be seen steadily and with an
embracing eye and in an undisturbed and all-comprehending and
all-penetrating light. Behind this little personality which is a helpless
instrument, a passive or vainly resistant puppet of Nature and a form figured
in her creations, there is an impersonal self one in all which sees and knows
all things; there is an equal, impartial, universal presence and support of
creation, a witnessing consciousness that suffers Nature to work out the
becoming of things in their own type, \s{svabh\=ava}, but does not involve and
lose itself in the action she initiates. To draw back from the ego and the
troubled personality into this calm, equal, eternal, universal, impersonal Self is
the first step towards a seeing action in Yoga done in conscious union with
the divine Being and the infallible Will that, however obscure now to us,
manifests itself in the universe.
\par When we live tranquilly poised in this self of impersonal wideness, then
because that is vast, calm, quiescent, impersonal,
Page 453

our other little false self, our ego of action disappears into its largeness and
we see that it is Nature that acts and not we, that all action is the action of
Nature and can be nothing else. And this thing we call Nature is a universal
executive Power of eternal being in motion which takes different shapes and
forms in this or that class of its creatures and in each individual of the species
according to its type of natural existence and the resultant function and law
of its works. According to its nature each creature must act and it cannot act
by anything else. Ego and personal will and desire are nothing more than
vividly conscious forms and limited natural workings of a universal Force that
is itself formless and infinite and far exceeds them; reason and intelligence
and mind and sense and life and body, all that we vaunt or take for our own,
are Nature's instruments and creations. But the impersonal Self does not act
and is not part of Nature: it observes the action from behind and above and
remains lord of itself and a free and impassive knower and witness. The soul
that lives in this impersonality is not affected by the actions of which our
nature is an instrument; it does not reply to them or their effects by grief and
joy, desire and shrinking, attraction and repulsion or any of the hundred
dualities that draw and shake and afflict us. It regards all men and all things
and all happenings with equal eyes, watches the modes or qualities of Nature
acting on the modes or qualities, sees the whole secret of the mechanism, but
is itself beyond these modes and qualities, a pure absolute essential being,
impassive, free, at peace. Nature works out her action and the soul
impersonal and universal supports her but is not involved, is not attached, is
not entangled, is not troubled, is not bewildered. If we can live in this equal
self, we too are at peace; our works continue so long as Nature's impulsion
prolongs itself in our instruments, but there is a spiritual freedom and
quiescence.
\par This duality of Self and Nature, quiescent Purusha, active Prakriti, is not,
however, the whole of our being; these are not really the two last words in
the matter. If it were so, either all works would be quite indifferent to the soul
and this or that action or refraining from action would take place by some
ungoverned
Page 454

turn of the mobile variations of the gunas,—Arjuna would be moved to battle
by rajasic impulse in the instruments or withheld from it by tamasic inertia or
sattwic indifference,—or else, if it so is that he must act and act only in this
way, it would be by some mechanical determinism of Nature. Moreover,
since the soul in its retreat would come to live in the impersonal quiescent
Self and cease to live at all in active Nature, the final result would be
quiescence, cessation, inertia, not the action imposed by the Gita. And, finally,
this duality gives no real explanation why the soul is at all called to involve
itself in Nature and her works; for it cannot be that the one ever uninvolved
self-conscient spirit gets itself involved and loses its self-knowledge and has
to return to that knowledge. This pure Self, this Atman is on the contrary
always there, always the same, always the one self-conscient impersonal
aloof Witness or impartial supporter of the action. It is this lacuna, this
impossible vacuum that compels us to suppose two Purushas or two poses of
the one Purusha, one secret in the Self that observes all from its
self-existence—or perhaps observes nothing, another self-projected into
Nature that lends itself to her action and identifies itself with her creations.
But even this dualism of Self and Prakriti or Maya corrected by the dualism
of the two Purushas is not the whole philosophic creed of the Gita. It goes
beyond them to the supreme all-embracing oneness of a highest Purusha,
Purushottama.
\par The Gita affirms that there is a supreme Mystery, a highest Reality that
upholds and reconciles the truth of these two different manifestations. There
is an utmost supreme Self, Lord and Brahman, one who is both the
impersonal and the personal, but other and greater than either of them and
other and greater than both of them together. He is Purusha, Self and soul of
our being, but he is also Prakriti; for Prakriti is the power of the All-Soul, the
power of the Eternal and Infinite self-moved to action and creation. The
supreme Ineffable, the universal Person, he becomes by his Prakriti all these
creatures. The supreme Atman and Brahman, he manifests by his Maya of
self-knowledge and his Maya of ignorance the double truth of the cosmic
riddle. The supreme Lord, master of his Force, his Shakti, he creates, impels
Page 455

and governs all this Nature and all the personality, power and works of these
innumerable existences. Each soul is a partial being of this self-existent One,
an eternal soul of this All-Soul, a partial manifestation of this supreme Lord
and his universal Nature. All here is this Divine, this Godhead, Vasudeva; for
by Nature and the soul in Nature he becomes all that is and everything
proceeds from him and lives in or by him, though he himself is greater than
any widest manifestation, any deepest spirit, any cosmic figure. This is the
complete truth of existence and this all the secret of the universal action that
we have seen disengaging itself from the later chapters of the Gita.
\par But how does this greater truth modify or how affect the principle of
spiritual action? It modifies it to begin with in this fundamental matter that the
whole meaning of the relation of Self and soul and Nature gets changed,
opens out to a new vision, fills in the blanks that were left, acquires a greater
amplitude, assumes a true and spiritually positive, a flawlessly integral
significance. The world is no longer a purely mechanical qualitative action
and determination of Nature set over against the quiescence of an impersonal
self-existence which has no quality or power of self-determination, no ability
or impulse to create. The chasm left by this unsatisfactory dualism is bridged
and an uplifting unity revealed between knowledge and works, the soul and
Nature. The quiescent impersonal Self is a truth,—it is the truth of the calm
of the Godhead, the silence of the Eternal, the freedom of the Lord of all birth
and becoming and action and creation, his calm infinite freedom of
self-existence not bound, troubled or affected by his creation, not touched by
the action and reaction of his Nature. Nature itself is now no inexplicable
illusion, no separated and opposite phenomenon, but a movement of the
Eternal, all her stir and activity and multiplicity founded and supported on the
detached and observing tranquillity of an immutable self and spirit. The Lord
of Nature remains that immutable self even while he is at the same time the
one and multiple soul of the universe and becomes in a partial manifestation
all these forces, powers, consciousnesses, gods, animals, things, men. Nature
of the gunas is a lower self-limited
Page 456

action of his power; it is nature of imperfectly conscious manifestation and
therefore of a certain ignorance. The truth of the self, even as the truth of the
Divine, is held back from her surface force absorbed here in its outer
action—much as man's deeper being is held back from the knowledge of his
surface consciousness—until the soul in her turns to find out this hidden thing,
gets inside itself and discovers its own real verities, its heights and its depths.
That is why it has to draw back from its little personal and egoistic to its large
and impersonal, immutable and universal Self in order to become capable of
self-knowledge. But the Lord is there, not only in that self, but in Nature. He
is in the heart of every creature and guides by his presence the turnings of
this great natural mechanism. He is present in all, all lives in him, all is himself
because all is a becoming of his being, a portion or a figure of his existence.
But all proceeds here in a lower partial working that has come out of a
secret, a higher and greater and completer nature of Divinity, the eternal
infinite nature or absolute self-power of the Godhead, \s{dev\=atma\'sakti}. The
perfect, integrally conscious soul hidden in man, an eternal portion of Deity, a
spiritual being of the eternal Divine Being, can open in us and can too open us
to him if we live constantly in this true truth of his action and our existence.
The seeker of Godhead has to get back to the reality of his immutable and
eternal impersonal self and at the same time he has to see everywhere the
Divine from whom he proceeds, to see him as all, to see him in the whole of
this mutable Nature and in every part and result of her and in all her
workings, and there too to make himself one with God, there too to live in
him, to enter there too into the divine oneness. He unites in that integrality the
divine calm and freedom of his deep essential existence with a supreme
power of instrumental action in his divinised self of Nature.
\par But how is this to be done? It can be done first by a right spirit in our will
of works. The seeker has to regard all his action as a sacrifice to the Lord of
works who is the eternal and universal Being and his own highest Self and
the Self of all others and the supreme all-inhabiting, all-containing,
all-governing
Page 457

Godhead in the universe. The whole action of Nature is such a
sacrifice,—offered at first indeed to the divine Powers that move her and
move in her, but these powers are only limited forms and names of the One
and Illimitable. Man ordinarily offers his sacrifice openly or under a disguise
to his own ego; his oblation is the false action of his own self-will and
ignorance. Or he offers his knowledge, action, aspiration, works of energy
and effort to the gods for partial, temporal and personal aims. The man of
knowledge, the liberated soul offers on the contrary all his activities to the
one eternal Godhead without any attachment to their fruit or to the
satisfaction of his lower personal desires. He works for God, not for himself,
for the universal welfare, for the Soul of the world and not for any particular
object which is of his own personal creation or for any construction of his
mental will or object of his vital longings, as a divine agent, not as a principal
and separate profiteer in the world-commerce. And this, it must be noted, is a
thing that cannot be really done except in proportion as the mind arrives at
equality, universality, wide impersonality, and a clear freedom from every
disguise of the insistent ego: for without these things the claim to be thus
acting is a pretension or an illusion. The whole action of the world is the
business of the Lord of the universe, the concern of the self-existent Spirit of
whom it is the unceasing creation, the progressive becoming, the significant
manifestation and living symbol in Nature. The fruits are his, the results are
those determined by him and our personal action is only a minor contribution
ruled or overruled, so far as its motive is an egoistic claim, by this Self and
Spirit in us who is the Self and Spirit in all and governs things for the universal
end and good and not for the sake of our ego. To work impersonally,
desirelessly and without attachment to the fruits of our work, for the sake of
God and the world and the greater Self and the fulfilment of the universal
will,—this is the first step towards liberation and perfection.
\par But beyond this step there lies that other greater motion, the inner
surrender of all our actions to the Divinity within us. For it is infinite Nature
that impels our works and a divine
Page 458

Will in and above her that demands action of us; the choice and turn our ego
gives to it is a contribution of our tamasic, rajasic, sattwic quality, a
deformation in the lower Nature. The deformation comes by the ego thinking
of itself as the doer; the character of the act takes the form of the limited
personal nature and the soul is bound up with that and its narrow figures and
does not allow the act to proceed freely and purely from the infinite power
within it. And the ego is chained to the act and its outcome; it must suffer the
personal consequence and reaction even as it claims the responsible
origination and personal will of the doing. The free perfect working comes
first by referring and finally by surrendering altogether the action and its
origination to the divine Master of our existence; for we feel it progressively
taken up by a supreme Presence within us, the soul drawn into deep intimacy
and close unity with an inner Power and Godhead and the work originated
directly from the greater Self, from the all-wise, infinite, universal force of an
eternal being and not from the ignorance of the little personal ego. The action
is chosen and shaped according to the nature, but entirely by the divine Will in
the nature, and it is therefore free and perfect within, whatever its outward
appearance; it comes stamped with the inward spiritual seal of the Infinite as
the thing to be done, the movement and the step of the movement decreed in
the ways of the omniscient Master of action, \s{kartavya\.m karma}. The soul
of the liberated man is free in its impersonality, even while he contributes to
the action as its means and its occasion his instrumental personal
self-creation and the special will and power in his nature. That will and power
is now not separately, egoistically his own, but a force of the suprapersonal
Divine who acts in this becoming of his own self, this one of his myriad
personalities by means of the characteristic form of the natural being, the
swabhava. This is the high secret and mystery, \s{uttama\.m rahasyam}, of
the action of the liberated man. It is the result of a growing of the human soul
into a divine Light and of the union of its nature with a highest universal
nature.
\par This change cannot come about except by knowledge. There is
necessary a right knowledge of self and God and world and a
Page 459

living and growing into the greater consciousness to which that knowledge
admits us. We know now what the knowledge is. It is sufficient to remember
that it reposes on another and wider vision than the human mental, a changed
vision and experience by which one is first of all liberated from the limitations
of the ego sense and its contacts and feels and sees the one self in all, all in
God, all beings as Vasudeva, all as vessels of the Godhead and one's self too
as a significant being and soul-power of that one Godhead; it treats in a
spiritual uniting consciousness all the happenings of the lives of others as if
they were happenings of one's own life; it allows no wall of separation and
lives in a universal sympathy with all existences, while amidst the
world-movement one still does the work that has to be done for the good of
all, \s{sarva-bh\=uta-hite}, according to the way appointed by the Divine and in
the measures imposed by the command of the Spirit who is Master of Time.
Thus living and acting in this knowledge the soul of man becomes united with
the Eternal in personality and in impersonality, lives in the Eternal though
acting in Time, even as the Eternal acts, and is free, perfect and blissful
whatever may be the form and determination of the work done in Nature.
\par The liberated man has the complete and total knowledge, \s{k\,rtsnavid},
and does all works without any of the restrictions made by the mind,
\s{k\,rtsna-karma-k\,rt}, according to the force and freedom and infinite power
of the divine will within him. And since he is united with the Eternal, he has
too the pure spiritual and illimitable joy of his eternal existence. He turns with
adoration to the Self of whom he is a portion, the Master of his works and
divine Lover of his soul and nature. He is not an impassive calm spectator
only; he lifts not only his knowledge and will to the Eternal, but his heart also
of love and adoration and passion. For without that uplifting of the heart his
whole nature is not fulfilled and united with God; the ecstasy of the spirit's
calm needs to be transformed by the ecstasy of the soul's Ananda. Beyond
the personal Jiva and the impersonal Brahman or Atman he reaches the
supracosmic Purushottama who is immutable in impersonality and fulfils
himself in personality and draws us to
Page 460

him through these two different attractions. The liberated seeker rises
personally to that highest Numen by his soul's love and joy in God and the
adoration of the will in him for the Master of its works; the peace and
largeness of his impersonal universal knowledge is perfected by delight in the
self-existent integral close and intimate reality of this surpassing and universal
Godhead. This delight glorifies his knowledge and unites it with the eternal
delight of the Spirit in its self and its manifestation; this perfects too his
personality in the superperson of the divine Purusha and makes his natural
being and action one with eternal beauty, eternal harmony, eternal love and
Ananda.
\par But all this change means a total passing from the lower human to the
higher divine nature. It is a lifting of our whole being or at least of the whole
mental being that wills, knows and feels beyond what we are into some
highest spiritual consciousness, some satisfying fullest power of existence,
some deepest widest delight of the spirit. And this may well be possible by a
transcendence of our present natural life, it may well be possible in some
celestial state beyond the earthly existence or still beyond in a supracosmic
superconscience; it may happen by transition to an absolute and infinite
power and status of the Spirit. But while we are here in the body, here in life,
here in action, what in this change becomes of the lower nature? For at
present all our activities are determined in their trend and shape by the
nature, and this Nature here is the nature of the three gunas, and in all natural
being and in all natural activities there is the triple guna, tamas with its
ignorance and inertia, rajas with its kinesis and action, its passion and grief
and perversion, sattwa with its light and happiness, and the bondage of these
things. And granted that the soul becomes superior in the self to the three
gunas, how does it escape in its instrumental nature from their working and
result and bondage? For even the man of knowledge, says the Gita, must act
according to his nature. To feel and bear the reactions of the gunas in the
outer manifestation, but to be free from them and superior in the observing
conscious self behind is not sufficient; for it leaves still a dualism of freedom
and subjection, a contradiction between what we are within and
Page 461

what we are without, between our self and our power, what we know
ourselves to be and what we will and do. Where is the release here, where
the full elevation and transformation to the higher spiritual nature, the
immortal Dharma, the law proper to the infinite purity and power of a divine
being? If this change cannot be effected while in the body, then so it must be
said, that the whole nature cannot be transformed and there must remain an
unreconciled duality until the mortal type of existence drops off like a
discarded shell from the spirit. But in that case the gospel of works cannot
well be the right or at least cannot be the ultimate gospel: a perfect
quiescence or at least as perfect a quiescence as possible, a progressive
Sannyasa and renunciation of works would seem still to be the true counsel
of perfection, —as indeed the Mayavadin contends, who says that the Gita's
way is no doubt the right way so long as we remain in action, but still all
works are an illusion and quiescence the highest path. To act in this spirit is
well, but only as a transition to a renunciation of all works, to cessation, to an
absolute quiescence.
\par This is the difficulty which the Gita has still to meet in order to justify
works to the seeker after the Spirit. Otherwise it must say to Arjuna, “Act
temporarily in this fashion, but afterwards seek the higher way of
renunciation of works.” But on the contrary it has said that not the cessation
of works, but renunciation of desire is the better way; it has spoken of the
action of the liberated man, \s{muktasya karma}. It has even insisted on
doing all actions, \s{sarv\=a\,ni karm\=a\,ni}, \s{k\,rtsna-karma-k\,rt}; it has said that in
whatever way the perfected Yogin lives and acts, he lives and acts in God.
This can only be, if the nature also in its dynamics and workings becomes
divine, a power imperturbable, intangible, inviolate, pure and untroubled by the
reactions of the inferior Prakriti. How and by what steps is this most difficult
transformation to be effected? What is this last secret of the soul's
perfection? what the principle or the process of this transmutation of our
human and earthly nature?
Page 462

\par
\HN XVII
\par
\ht Deva and Asura
\note{Gita, XVI.}
\par\drop The practical difficulty of the change from the ignorant and
shackled normal nature of man to the dynamic freedom of a divine and
spiritual being will be apparent if we ask ourselves, more narrowly, how the
transition can be effected from the fettered embarrassed functioning of the
three qualities to the infinite action of the liberated man who is no longer
subject to the gunas. The transition is indispensable; for it is clearly laid down
that he must be above or else without the three gunas, \s{trigu\,n\=at\=ita},
\s{nistraigu\,nya}. On the other hand it is no less clearly, no less emphatically
laid down that in every natural existence here on earth the three gunas are
there in their inextricable working and it is even said that all action of man or
creature or force is merely the action of these three modes upon each other,
a functioning in which one or other predominates and the rest modify its
operation and results, \s{gu\,n\=a gu\,ne\,su vartante}. How then can there be
another dynamic and kinetic nature or any other kind of works? To act is to
be subject to the three qualities of Nature; to be beyond these conditions of
her working is to be silent in the Spirit. The Ishwara, the Supreme who is
master of all her works and functions and guides and determines them by his
divine will, is indeed above this mechanism of quality, not touched or limited
by her modes, but still it would seem that he acts always through them,
always shapes by the power of the swabhava and through the psychological
machinery of the gunas. These three are fundamental properties of Prakriti,
necessary operations of the executive Nature-force which takes shape here
in us, and the Jiva himself is only a portion of the Divine in this Prakriti. If
then the liberated man still does works, still moves in the kinetic movement, it
must be
Page 463

so that he moves and acts, in Nature and by the limitation of her qualities,
subject to their reactions, not, in so far as the natural part of him persists, in
the freedom of the Divine. But the Gita has said exactly the opposite, that the
liberated Yogin is delivered from the guna reactions and whatever he does,
however he lives, moves and acts in God, in the power of his freedom and
immortality, in the law of the supreme eternal Infinite, \s{sarvath\=a
vartam\=ano'pi sa yog\=i mayi vartate}. There seems here to be a contradiction,
an impasse.
\par But this is only when we knot ourselves up in the rigid logical oppositions
of the analytic mind, not when we look freely and subtly at the nature of spirit
and at the spirit in Nature. What moves the world is not really the modes of
Prakriti,—these are only the lower aspect, the mechanism of our normal
nature. The real motive power is a divine spiritual Will which uses at present
these inferior conditions, but is itself not limited, not dominated, not
mechanised, as is the human will, by the gunas. No doubt, since these modes
are so universal in their action, they must proceed from something inherent in
the power of the Spirit; there must be powers in the divine Will-force from
which these aspects of Prakriti have their origin. For everything in the lower
normal nature is derived from the higher spiritual power of being of the
Purushottama, \s{matta\,h pravartate}; it does not come into being {\it de
novo} and without a spiritual cause. Something in the essential power of the
spirit there must be from which the sattwic light and satisfaction, the rajasic
kinesis, the tamasic inertia of our nature are derivations and of which they
are the imperfect or degraded forms. But once we get back to these sources
in their purity above this imperfection and degradation of them in which we
live, we shall find that these motions put on a quite different aspect as soon
as we begin to live in the spirit. Being and action and the modes of being and
action become altogether different things, far above their present limited
appearance.
\par For what is behind this troubled kinesis of the cosmos with all its clash
and struggle? What is it that when it touches the mind, when it puts on mental
values, creates the reactions of desire, striving, straining, error of will, sorrow,
sin, pain? It is a
Page 464

will of the spirit in movement, it is a large divine will in action which is not
touched by these things; it is a power
\note{\s{tapas}, \s{cit-\'sakti}.} of the free and infinite conscious Godhead
which has no desire because it exercises a universal possession and a
spontaneous Ananda of its movements. Wearied by no striving and straining,
it enjoys a free mastery of its means and its objects; misled by no error of the
will, it holds a knowledge of self and things which is the source of its mastery
and its Ananda; overcome by no sorrow, sin or pain, it has the joy and purity
of its being and the joy and purity of its power. The soul that lives in God acts
by this spiritual will and not by the normal will of the unliberated mind: its
kinesis takes place by this spiritual force and not by the rajasic mode of
Nature, precisely because it no longer lives in the lower movement to which
that deformation belongs, but has got back in the divine nature to the pure and
perfect sense of the kinesis.
\par And again what is behind the inertia of Nature, behind this Tamas which,
when complete, makes her action like the blind driving of a machine, a
mechanical impetus unobservant of anything except the groove in which it is
set to spin and not conscious even of the law of that motion,—this Tamas
that turns cessation of the accustomed action into death and disintegration
and becomes in the mind a power for inaction and ignorance? This tamas is
an obscurity which mistranslates, we may say, into inaction of power and
inaction of knowledge the Spirit's eternal principle of calm and repose—the
repose which the Divine never loses even while he acts, the eternal repose
which supports his integral action of knowledge and the force of his creative
will both there in its own infinities and here in an apparent limitation of its
working and self-awareness. The peace of the Godhead is not a
disintegration of energy or a vacant inertia; it would keep all that Infinity has
known and done gathered up and concentratedly conscious in an omnipotent
silence even if the Power everywhere ceased for a time actively to know and
create. The Eternal does not need to sleep or rest; he does not get tired and
flag; he has no need
Page 465

of a pause to refresh and recreate his exhausted energies; for his energy is
inexhaustibly the same, indefatigable and infinite. The Godhead is calm and at
rest in the midst of his action; and on the other hand his very cessation of
action would retain in it the full power and all the potentialities of his kinesis.
The liberated soul enters into this calm and participates in the eternal repose
of the spirit. This is known to everyone who has had any taste at all of the joy
of liberation, that it contains an eternal power of calm. And that profound
tranquillity can remain in the very heart of action, can persevere in the most
violent motion of forces. There may be an impetuous flood of thought, doing,
will, movement, an overflowing rush of love, the emotion of the self-existent
spiritual ecstasy at its strongest intensity, and that may extend itself to a fiery
and forceful spiritual enjoyment of things and beings in the world and in the
ways of Nature, and yet this tranquillity and repose would be behind the
surge and in it, always conscious of its depths, always the same. The calm of
the liberated man is not an indolence, incapacity, insensibility, inertia; it is full
of immortal power, capable of all action, attuned to deepest delight, open to
profoundest love and compassion and to every manner of intensest Ananda.
\par And so too beyond the inferior light and happiness of that purest quality
of Nature, Sattwa, the power that makes for assimilation and equivalence,
right knowledge and right dealing, fine harmony, firm balance, right law of
action, right possession and brings so full a satisfaction to the mind, beyond
this highest thing in the normal nature, admirable in itself so far as it goes and
while it can be maintained, but precarious, secured by limitation, dependent on
rule and condition, there is at its high and distant source a greater light and
bliss free in the free spirit. That is not limited nor dependent on limitation or
rule or condition but self-existent and unalterable, not the result of this or that
harmony amid the discords of our nature but the fount of harmony and able to
create whatever harmony it will. That is a luminous spiritual and in its native
action a direct supramental force of knowledge, \s{jyoti\,h}, not our modified
and derivative mental light, \s{prak\=a\'sa}. That is the light and bliss
Page 466

of widest self-existence, spontaneous self-knowledge, intimate universal
identity, deepest self-interchange, not of acquisition, assimilation, adjustment
and laboured equivalence. That light is full of a luminous spiritual will and
there is no gulf or disparateness between its knowledge and its action. That
delight is not our paler mental happiness, \s{sukham}, but a profound
concentrated intense self-existent bliss extended to all that our being does,
envisages, creates, a fixed divine rapture, Ananda. The liberated soul
participates more and more profoundly in this light and bliss and grows the
more perfectly into it, the more integrally it unites itself with the Divine. And
while among the gunas of the lower Nature there is a necessary
disequilibrium, a shifting inconstancy of measures and a perpetual struggle for
domination, the greater light and bliss, calm, will of kinesis of the Spirit do not
exclude each other, are not at war, are not even merely in equilibrium, but
each an aspect of the two others and in their fullness all are inseparable and
one. Our mind when it approaches the Divine may seem to enter into one to
the exclusion of another, may appear for instance to achieve calm to the
exclusion of kinesis of action, but that is because we approach him first
through the selecting spirit in the mind. Afterwards when we are able to rise
above even the spiritual mind, we can see that each divine power contains all
the rest and can get rid of this initial error.
\note{The account given here of the supreme spiritual and supramental forms
of highest Nature action corresponding to the gunas is not derived from the
Gita, but introduced from spiritual experience. The Gita does not describe in
any detail the action of the highest Nature, \s{rahasyam uttamam}; it leaves
that for the seeker to discover by his own spiritual experience. It only points
out the nature of the high sattwic temperament and action through which this
supreme mystery has to be reached and insists at the same time on the
overpassing of Sattwa and transcendence of the three gunas.}
\par We see then that action is possible without the subjection of the soul to
the normal degraded functioning of the modes of Nature. That functioning
depends on the mental, vital and physical limitation into which we are cast; it
is a deformation, an incapacity, a wrong or depressed value imposed on us by
the mind and life in matter. When we grow into the spirit, this
Page 467

dharma or inferior law of Nature is replaced by the immortal dharma of the
spirit; there is the experience of a free immortal action, a divine illimitable
knowledge, a transcendent power, an unfathomable repose. But still there
remains the question of the transition; for there must be a transition, a
proceeding by steps, since nothing in God's workings in this world is done by
an abrupt action without procedure or basis. We have the thing we seek in
us, but we have in practice to evolve it out of the inferior forms of our
nature.
\note{This is from the point of view of our nature ascending upwards by
self-conquest, effort and discipline. There must also intervene more and more
a descent of the divine Light, Presence and Power into the being to transform
it; otherwise the change at the point of culmination and beyond it cannot take
place. That is why there comes in as the last movement the necessity of an
absolute self-surrender.} Therefore in the action of the modes itself there
must be some means, some leverage, some {\it point d'appui}, by which we
can effect this transformation. The Gita finds it in the full development of the
sattwic guna till that in its potent expansion reaches a point at which it can go
beyond itself and disappear into its source. The reason is evident, because
sattwa is a power of light and happiness, a force that makes for calm and
knowledge, and at its highest point it can arrive at a certain reflection, almost
a mental identity with the spiritual light and bliss from which it derives. The
other two gunas cannot get this transformation, rajas into the divine kinetic
will or tamas into the divine repose and calm, without the intervention of the
sattwic power in Nature. The principle of inertia will always remain an inert
inaction of power or an incapacity of knowledge until its ignorance disappears
in illumination and its torpid incapacity is lost in the light and force of the
omnipotent divine will of repose. Then only can we have the supreme calm.
Therefore tamas must be dominated by sattwa. The principle of rajas for the
same reason must remain always a restless, troubled, feverish or unhappy
working because it has not right knowledge; its native movement is a wrong
and perverse action, perverse through ignorance. Our will must purify itself
by knowledge; it must get more and more to a right and luminously informed
action before it can be converted into the divine kinetic will. That again
means
Page 468

the necessity of the intervention of sattwa. The sattwic quality is a first
mediator between the higher and the lower nature. It must indeed at a certain
point transform or escape from itself and break up and dissolve into its
source; its conditioned derivative seeking light and carefully constructed
action must change into the free direct dynamics and spontaneous light of the
spirit. But meanwhile a high increase of sattwic power delivers us largely
from the tamasic and the rajasic disqualification; and its own disqualification,
once we are not pulled too much downward by rajas and tamas, can be
surmounted with a greater ease. To develop sattwa till it becomes full of
spiritual light and calm and happiness is the first condition of this preparatory
discipline of the nature.
\par That, we shall find, is the whole intention of the remaining chapters of
the Gita. But first it prefaces the consideration of this enlightening movement
by a distinction between two kinds of being, the Deva and the Asura; for the
Deva is capable of a high self-transforming sattwic action, the Asura
incapable. We must see what is the object of this preface and the precise
bearing of this distinction. The general nature of all human beings is the same,
it is a mixture of the three gunas; it would seem then that in all there must be
the capacity to develop and strengthen the sattwic element and turn it upward
towards the heights of the divine transformation. That our ordinary turn is
actually towards making our reason and will the servants of our rajasic or
tamasic egoism, the ministers of our restless and ill-balanced kinetic desire or
our self-indulgent indolence and static inertia, can only be, one would imagine,
a temporary characteristic of our undeveloped spiritual being, a rawness of its
imperfect evolution and must disappear when our consciousness rises in the
spiritual scale. But we actually see that men, at least men above a certain
level, fall very largely into two classes, those who have a dominant force of
sattwic nature turned towards knowledge, self-control, beneficence,
perfection and those who have a dominant force of rajasic nature turned
towards egoistic greatness, satisfaction of desire, the indulgence of their own
strong will and personality which they seek to impose on the
Page 469

world, not for the service of man or God, but for their own pride, glory and
pleasure. These are the human representatives of the Devas and Danavas or
Asuras, the Gods and the Titans. This distinction is a very ancient one in
Indian religious symbolism. The fundamental idea of the Rig Veda is a
struggle between the Gods and their dark opponents, between the Masters of
Light, sons of Infinity, and the children of Division and Night, a battle in
which man takes part and which is reflected in all his inner life and action.
This was also a fundamental principle of the religion of Zoroaster. The same
idea is prominent in later literature. The Ramayana is in its ethical intention
the parable of an enormous conflict between the Deva in human form and
the incarnate Rakshasa, between the representative of a high culture and
Dharma and a huge unbridled force and gigantic civilisation of the
exaggerated Ego. The Mahabharata, of which the Gita is a section, takes for
its subject a lifelong clash between human Devas and Asuras, the men of
power, sons of the Gods, who are governed by the light of a high ethical
Dharma and others who are embodied Titans, the men of power who are out
for the service of their intellectual, vital and physical ego. The ancient mind,
more open than ours to the truth of things behind the physical veil, saw behind
the life of man great cosmic Powers or beings representative of certain turns
or grades of the universal Shakti, divine, titanic, gigantic, demoniac, and men
who strongly represented in themselves these types of nature were
themselves considered as Devas, Asuras, Rakshasas, Pisachas. The Gita for
its own purposes takes up this distinction and develops the difference
between these two kinds of beings, \s{dvau bh\=utasargau}. It has spoken
previously of the nature which is Asuric and Rakshasic and obstructs
God-knowledge, salvation and perfection; it now contrasts it with the Daivic
nature which is turned to these things.
\par Arjuna, says the Teacher, is of the Deva nature. He need not grieve
with the thought that by acceptance of battle and slaughter he will be yielding
to the impulses of the Asura. The action on which all turns, the battle which
Arjuna has to fight with the incarnate Godhead as his charioteer at the
bidding of
Page 470

the Master of the world in the form of the Time-Spirit, is a struggle to
establish the kingdom of the Dharma, the empire of Truth, Right and Justice.
He himself is born in the Deva kind; he has developed in himself the sattwic
being, until he has now come to a point at which he is capable of a high
transformation and liberation from the \s{traigu\,nya} and therefore even from
the sattwic nature. The distinction between the Deva and the Asura is not
comprehensive of all humanity, not rigidly applicable to all its individuals,
neither is it sharp and definite in all stages of the moral or spiritual history of
the race or in all phases of the individual evolution. The tamasic man who
makes so large a part of the whole, falls into neither category as it is here
described, though he may have both elements in him in a low degree and for
the most part serves tepidly the lower qualities. The normal man is ordinarily
a mixture; but one or the other tendency is more pronounced, tends to make
him predominantly rajaso-tamasic or sattwo-rajasic and can be said to be
preparing him for either culmination, for the divine clarity or the titanic
turbulence. For here what is in question is a certain culmination in the
evolution of the qualitative nature, as will be evident from the descriptions
given in the text. On one side there can be a sublimation of the sattwic
quality, the culmination or manifestation of the unborn Deva, on the other a
sublimation of the rajasic turn of the soul in nature, the entire birth of the
Asura. The one leads towards that movement of liberation on which the Gita
is about to lay stress; it makes possible a high self-exceeding of the sattwa
quality and a transformation into the likeness of the divine being,
\s{vimok\,s\=aya}. The other leads away from that universal potentiality and
precipitates towards an exaggeration of our bondage to the ego. This is the
point of the distinction.
\par The Deva nature is distinguished by an acme of the sattwic habits and
qualities; self-control, sacrifice, the religious habit, cleanness and purity,
candour and straightforwardness, truth, calm and self-denial, compassion to
all beings, modesty, gentleness, forgivingness, patience, steadfastness, a deep
sweet and serious freedom from all restlessness, levity and inconstancy are
its native attributes. The Asuric qualities, wrath, greed, cunning,
Page 471

treachery, wilful doing of injury to others, pride and arrogance and excessive
self-esteem have no place in its composition. But its gentleness and
self-denial and self-control are free too from all weakness: it has energy and
soul force, strong resolution, the fearlessness of the soul that lives in the right
and according to the truth as well as its harmlessness, \s{teja\,h},
\s{abhayam}, \s{dh\,rti\,h}, \s{ahi\.ms\=a}, \s{satyam}. The whole being, the
whole temperament is integrally pure; there is a seeking for knowledge and a
calm and fixed abiding in knowledge. This is the wealth, the plenitude of the
man born into the Deva nature.
\par The Asuric nature has too its wealth, its plenitude of force, but it is of a
very different, a powerful and evil kind. Asuric men have no true knowledge
of the way of action or the way of abstention, the fulfilling or the holding in of
the nature. Truth is not in them, nor clean doing, nor faithful observance.
They see naturally in the world nothing but a huge play of the satisfaction of
self; theirs is a world with Desire for its cause and seed and governing force
and law, a world of Chance, a world devoid of just relation and linked Karma,
a world without God, not true, not founded in Truth. Whatever better
intellectual or higher religious dogma they may possess, this alone is the true
creed of their mind and will in action; they follow always the cult of Desire
and Ego. On that way of seeing life they lean in reality and by its falsehood
they ruin their souls and their reason. The Asuric man becomes the centre or
instrument of a fierce, Titanic, violent action, a power of destruction in the
world, a fount of injury and evil. Arrogant, full of self-esteem and the
drunkenness of their pride, these misguided souls delude themselves, persist
in false and obstinate aims and pursue the fixed impure resolution of their
longings. They imagine that desire and enjoyment are all the aim of life and in
their inordinate and insatiable pursuit of it they are the prey of a devouring, a
measurelessly unceasing care and thought and endeavour and anxiety till the
moment of their death. Bound by a hundred bonds, devoured by wrath and
lust, unweariedly occupied in amassing unjust gains which may serve their
enjoyment and the satisfaction of their craving, always they think, “Today I
have gained this object of desire, tomorrow I
Page 472

shall have that other; today I have so much wealth, more I will get tomorrow.
I have killed this my enemy, the rest too I will kill. I am a lord and king of
men, I am perfect, accomplished, strong, happy, fortunate, a privileged
enjoyer of the world; I am wealthy, I am of high birth; who is there like unto
me? I will sacrifice, I will give, I will enjoy.” Thus occupied by many egoistic
ideas, deluded, doing works, but doing them wrongly, acting mightily, but for
themselves, for desire, for enjoyment, not for God in themselves and God in
man, they fall into the unclean hell of their own evil. They sacrifice and give,
but from a self-regarding ostentation, from vanity and with a stiff and foolish
pride. In the egoism of their strength and power, in the violence of their wrath
and arrogance they hate, despise and belittle the God hidden in themselves
and the God in man. And because they have this proud hatred and contempt
of good and of God, because they are cruel and evil, the Divine casts them
down continually into more and more Asuric births. Not seeking him, they
find him not, and at last, losing the way to him altogether, sink down into the
lowest status of soul-nature, \s{adham\=a\.m gatim}.
\par This graphic description, even giving its entire value to the distinction it
implies, must not be pressed to carry more in it than it means. When it is said
that there are two creations of beings in this material world, Deva and
Asura,
\note{The distinction between the two creations has its full truth in
supraphysical planes where the law of spiritual evolution does not govern the
movement. There are worlds of the Devas, worlds of the Asuras, and there
are in these worlds behind us constant types of beings which support the
complex divine play of creation indispensable to the march of the universe
and cast their influence also on the earth and on the life and nature of man in
this physical plane of existence.} it is not meant that human souls are so
created by God from the beginning each with its own inevitable career in
Nature, nor is it meant that there is a rigid spiritual predestination and those
rejected from the beginning by the Divine are blinded by him so that they may
be thrust down to eternal perdition and the impurity of Hell. All souls are
eternal portions of the Divine, the Asura as well as the Deva, all can come to
salvation: even the greatest sinner can turn to the Divine. But the evolution of
the soul in Nature
Page 473

is an adventure of which Swabhava and the Karma governed by the
swabhava are ever the chief powers; and if an excess in the manifestation of
the swabhava, the self-becoming of the soul, a disorder in its play turns the
law of being to the perverse side, if the rajasic qualities are given the upper
hand, cultured to the diminution of sattwa, then the trend of Karma and its
results necessarily culminate not in the sattwic height which is capable of the
movement of liberation, but in the highest exaggeration of the perversities of
the lower nature. The man, if he does not stop short and abandon his way of
error, has eventually the Asura full-born in him, and once he has taken that
enormous turn away from the Light and Truth, he can no more reverse the
fatal speed of his course because of the very immensity of the misused divine
power in him until he has plumbed the depths to which it falls, found bottom
and seen where the way has led him, the power exhausted and misspent,
himself down in the lowest state of the soul nature, which is Hell. Only when
he understands and turns to the Light, does that other truth of the Gita come
in, that even the greatest sinner, the most impure and violent evil-doer is
saved the moment he turns to adore and follow after the Godhead within him.
Then, simply by that turn, he gets very soon into the sattwic way which leads
to perfection and freedom.
\par The Asuric Prakriti is the rajasic at its height; it leads to the slavery of
the soul in Nature, to desire, wrath and greed, the three powers of the rajasic
ego, and these are the threefold doors of Hell, the Hell into which the natural
being falls when it indulges the impurity and evil and error of its lower or
perverted instincts. These three are again the doors of a great darkness, they
fold back into tamas, the characteristic power of the original Ignorance; for
the unbridled force of the rajasic nature, when exhausted, falls back into the
weakness, collapse, darkness, incapacity of the worst tamasic soul-status. To
escape from this downfall one must get rid of these three evil forces and turn
to the light of the sattwic quality, live by the right, in the true relations,
according to the Truth and the Law; then one follows one's own higher good
and arrives at the highest soul-status.
Page 474

To follow the law of desire is not the true rule of our nature; there is a higher
and juster standard of its works. But where is it embodied or how is it to be
found? In the first place, the human race has always been seeking for this
just and high Law and whatever it has discovered is embodied in its Shastra,
its rule of science and knowledge, rule of ethics, rule of religion, rule of best
social living, rule of one's right relations with man and God and Nature.
Shastra does not mean a mass of customs, some good, some bad,
unintelligently followed by the customary routine mind of the tamasic man.
Shastra is the knowledge and teaching laid down by intuition, experience and
wisdom, the science and art and ethic of life, the best standards available to
the race. The half-awakened man who leaves the observance of its rule to
follow the guidance of his instincts and desires, can get pleasure but not
happiness; for the inner happiness can only come by right living. He cannot
move to perfection, cannot acquire the highest spiritual status. The law of
instinct and desire seems to come first in the animal world, but the manhood
of man grows by the pursuit of truth and religion and knowledge and a right
life. The Shastra, the recognised Right that he has set up to govern his lower
members by his reason and intelligent will, must therefore first be observed
and made the authority for conduct and works and for what should or should
not be done, till the instinctive desire nature is schooled and abated and put
down by the habit of self-control and man is ready first for a freer intelligent
self-guidance and then for the highest supreme law and supreme liberty of
the spiritual nature.
\par For the Shastra in its ordinary aspect is not that spiritual law, although at
its loftiest point, when it becomes a science and art of spiritual living,
Adhyatma-shastra,—the Gita itself describes its own teaching as the highest
and most secret Shastra,—it formulates a rule of the self-transcendence of
the sattwic nature and develops the discipline which leads to spiritual
transmutation. Yet all Shastra is built on a number of preparatory conditions,
dharmas; it is a means, not an end. The supreme end is the freedom of the
spirit when abandoning all dharmas the soul turns to God for its sole law of
action, acts straight from the
Page 475

divine will and lives in the freedom of the divine nature, not in the Law, but in
the Spirit. This is the development of the teaching which is prepared by the
next question of Arjuna.
Page 476

\par
\HN XVIII
\par
\ht The Gunas, Faith and Works
\note{Gita, XVII.}
\par\drop The Gita has made a distinction between action according to the
licence of personal desire and action done according to the Shastra. We must
understand by the latter the recognised science and art of life which is the
outcome of mankind's collective living, its culture, religion, science, its
progressive discovery of the best rule of life,—but mankind still walking in the
ignorance and proceeding in a half light towards knowledge. The action of
personal desire belongs to the unregenerated state of our nature and is
dictated by ignorance or false knowledge and an unregulated or ill-regulated
kinetic or rajasic egoism. The action controlled by Shastra is an outcome of
intellectual, ethical, aesthetic, social and religious culture; it embodies an
attempt at a certain right living, harmony and right order and is evidently an
effort, more or less advanced according to circumstances, of the sattwic
element in man to overtop, regulate and control or guide, where it must be
admitted, his rajasic and tamasic egoism. It is the means to a step in advance,
and therefore mankind must first proceed through it and make this Shastra its
law of action rather than obey the impulsion of its personal desires. This is a
general rule which humanity has always recognised wherever it has arrived
at any kind of established and developed society; it has an idea of an order, a
law, a standard of its perfection, something other than the guidance of its
desires or the crude direction of its raw impulses. This greater rule the
individual finds usually outside himself in some more or less fixed outcome of
the experience and wisdom of the race, which he accepts, to which his mind
and the leading parts of his being give their assent or sanction and which he
tries to make his own by living it in his mind, will and action.
Page 477

And this assent of the being, its conscious acceptance and will to believe and
realise, may be called by the name which the Gita gives to it, his faith,
\s{\'sraddh\=a}. The religion, the philosophy, the ethical law, the social idea, the
cultural idea in which I put my faith, gives me a law for my nature and its
works, an idea of relative right or an idea of relative or absolute perfection
and in proportion as I have a sincerity and completeness of faith in it and an
intensity of will to live according to that faith, I can become what it proposes
to me, I can shape myself into an image of that right or an exemplar of that
perfection.
\par But we see also that there is a freer tendency in man other than the
leading of his desires and other than his will to accept the Law, the fixed idea,
the safe governing rule of the Shastra. The individual frequently enough, the
community at any moment of its life is seen to turn away from the Shastra,
becomes impatient of it, loses that form of its will and faith and goes in
search of another law which it is now more disposed to accept as the right
rule of living and regard as a more vital or higher truth of existence. This may
happen when the established Shastra ceases to be a living thing and
degenerates or stiffens into a mass of customs and conventions. Or it may
come because it is found that the Shastra is imperfect or no longer useful for
the progress demanded; a new truth, a more perfect law of living has become
imperative. If that does not exist, it has to be discovered by the effort of the
race or by some great and illumined individual mind who embodies the desire
and seeking of the race. The Vedic law becomes a convention and a Buddha
appears with his new rule of the eightfold path and the goal of Nirvana; and it
may be remarked that he propounds it not as a personal invention, but as the
true rule of Aryan living constantly rediscovered by the Buddha, the
enlightened mind, the awakened spirit. But this practically means that there is
an ideal, an eternal Dharma which religion, philosophy, ethics and all other
powers in man that strive after truth and perfection are constantly
endeavouring to embody in new statements of the science and art of the
inner and outer life, a new Shastra. The Mosaic law of religious, ethical and
social righteousness is
Page 478

convicted of narrowness and imperfection and is now besides a convention;
the law of Christ comes to replace it and claims at once to abrogate and to
fulfil, to abrogate the imperfect form and fulfil in a deeper and broader light
and power the spirit of the thing which it aimed at, the divine rule of living.
And the human search does not stop there, but leaves these formulations too,
goes back to some past truth it had rejected or breaks forward to some new
truth and power, but is always in search of the same thing, the law of its
perfection, its rule of right living, its complete, highest and essential self and
nature.
\par This movement begins with the individual, who is no longer satisfied with
the law because he finds that it no longer corresponds to his idea and largest
or intensest experience of himself and existence and therefore he can no
longer bring to it the will to believe and practise. It does not correspond to his
inner way of being, it is not to him \s{sat}, the thing that truly is, the right, the
highest or best or real good; it is not the truth and law of his or of all being.
The Shastra is something impersonal to the individual, and that gives it its
authority over the narrow personal law of his members; but at the same time
it is personal to the collectivity and is the outcome of its experience, its
culture or its nature. It is not in all its form and spirit the ideal rule of
fulfilment of the Self or the eternal law of the Master of our nature, although
it may contain in itself in small or larger measure indications, preparations,
illuminating glimpses of that far greater thing. And the individual may have
gone beyond the collectivity and be ready for a greater truth, a wider walk, a
deeper intention of the Life-Spirit. The leading in him that departs from the
Shastra may not indeed be always a higher movement; it may take the form
of a revolt of the egoistic or rajasic nature seeking freedom from the yoke of
something which it feels to be cramping to its liberty of self-fulfilment and
self-finding. But even then it is often justified by some narrowness or
imperfection of the Shastra or by the degradation of the current rule of living
into a merely restricting or lifeless convention. And so far it is legitimate, it
appeals to a truth, it has a good and just reason for existence: for though it
misses the right path, yet the free action of the rajasic
Page 479

ego, because it has more in it of liberty and life, is better than the dead and
hidebound tamasic following of a convention. The rajasic is always stronger,
always more forcefully inspired and has more possibilities in it than the
tamasic nature. But also this leading may be sattwic at its heart; it may be a
turn to a larger and greater ideal which will carry us nearer to a more
complete and ample truth of our self and universal existence than has yet
been seen and nearer therefore to that highest law which is one with the
divine freedom. And in effect this movement is usually an attempt to lay hold
on some forgotten truth or to move on to a yet undiscovered or unlived truth
of our being. It is not a mere licentious movement of the unregulated nature;
it has its spiritual justification and is a necessity of our spiritual progress. And
even if the Shastra is still a living thing and the best rule for the human
average, the exceptional man, spiritual, inwardly developed, is not bound by
that standard. He is called upon to go beyond the fixed line of the Shastra.
For this is a rule for the guidance, control and relative perfection of the
normal imperfect man and he has to go on to a more absolute perfection: this
is a system of fixed dharmas and he has to learn to live in the liberty of the
Spirit.
\par But what then shall be the secure base of an action which departs both
from the guidance of desire and from the normal law? For the rule of desire
has an authority of its own, no longer safe or satisfactory to us as it is to the
animal or as it might have been to a primitive humanity, but still, so far as it
goes, founded on a very living part of our nature and fortified by its strong
indications; and the law, the Shastra has behind it all the authority of long
established rule, old successful sanctions and a secure past experience. But
this new movement is of the nature of a powerful adventure into the
unknown or partly known, a daring development and a new conquest, and
what then is the clue to be followed, the guiding light on which it can depend
or its strong basis in our being? The answer is that the clue and support is to
be found in man's \s{\'sraddh\=a}, his faith, his will to believe, to live what he
sees or thinks to be the truth of himself and of existence. In other words this
movement is man's appeal
Page 480

to himself or to something potent and compelling in himself or in universal
existence for the discovery of his truth, his law of living, his way to fullness
and perfection. And everything depends on the nature of his faith, the thing in
himself or in the universal soul—of which he is a portion or manifestation—to
which he directs it and on how near he gets by it to his real self and the Self
or true being of the universe. If he is tamasic, obscure, clouded, if he has an
ignorant faith, an inept will, he will reach nothing true and will fall away to his
lower nature. If he is lured by false rajasic lights, he can be carried away by
self-will into bypaths that may lead to morass or precipice. In either case his
only chance of salvation lies in a return of sattwa upon him to impose a new
enlightened order and rule upon his members which will liberate him from the
violent error of his self-will or the dull error of his clouded ignorance. If on
the other hand he has the sattwic nature and a sattwic faith and direction for
his steps, he will arrive in sight of a higher yet unachieved ideal rule which
may lead him even in rare instances beyond the sattwic light some way at
least towards a highest divine illumination and divine way of being and living.
For if the sattwic light is so strong in him as to bring him to its own
culminating point, then he will be able advancing from that point to make out
his gate of entrance into some first ray of that which is divine, transcendent
and absolute. In all effort at self-finding these possibilities are there; they are
the conditions of this spiritual adventure.
\par Now we have to see how the Gita deals with this question on its own
line of spiritual teaching and self-discipline. For Arjuna puts immediately a
suggestive query from which the problem or one aspect of it arises. When
men, he says, sacrifice to God or the gods with faith, \s{\'sraddh\=a}, but
abandon the rule of the Shastra, what is that concentrated will of devotion in
them, \s{ni\,s\,th\=a}, which gives them this faith and moves them to this kind of
action? Is it sattwa, rajas or tamas? to which strand of our nature does it
belong? The answer of the Gita first states the principle that the faith in us is
of a triple kind like all things in Nature and varies according to the dominating
quality of our nature. The faith of each man takes the shape, hue, quality
given to it by his
Page 481

stuff of being, his constituting temperament, his innate power of existence,
\s{sattv\=anur\=up\=a sarvasya \'sraddh\=a}. And then there comes a remarkable line
in which the Gita tells us that this Purusha, this soul in man, is, as it were,
made of \s{\'sraddh\=a}, a faith, a will to be, a belief in itself and existence, and
whatever is that will, faith or constituting belief in him, he is that and that is
he. \s{\'Sraddh\=amayo 'ya\.m} \s{puru\,so yo yac-chraddha\,h sa eva sa\,h}. If we
look into this pregnant saying a little closely, we shall find that this single line
contains implied in its few forceful words almost the whole theory of the
modern gospel of pragmatism. For if a man or the soul in a man consists of
the faith which is in him, taken in this deeper sense, then it follows that the
truth which he sees and wills to live is for him the truth of his being, the truth
of himself that he has created or is creating and there can be for him no other
real truth. This truth is a thing of his inner and outer action, a thing of his
becoming, of the soul's dynamics, not of that in him which never changes. He
is what he is today by some past will of his nature sustained and continued by
a present will to know, to believe and to be in his intelligence and vital force,
and whatever new turn is taken by this will and faith active in his very
substance, that he will tend to become in the future. We create our own truth
of existence in our own action of mind and life, which is another way of
saying that we create our own selves, are our own makers.
\par But very obviously this is only one aspect of the truth, and all
one-aspected statements are suspect to the thinker. Truth is not merely
whatever our own personality is or creates; that is only the truth of our
becoming, one point or line of emphasis in a movement of widest volume.
Beyond our personality there is, first, a universal being as well as a universal
becoming of which ours is a little movement; and beyond that too there is the
eternal Being out of which all becoming derives and to which it owes its
potentialities, elements, original and final motives. We may say indeed that all
becoming is only an act of universal consciousness, is Maya, is a creation of
the will to become, and the only other reality, if there is any, is a pure eternal
existence beyond consciousness, featureless, unexpressed and
Page 482

inexpressible. That is practically the standpoint taken by the Mayavadin's
Adwaita and the sense of the distinction he makes between pragmatic truth
which to his mind is illusory or at least only temporarily and partly real—while
modern pragmatism takes it to be the true truth or at least the only
recognisable reality because the only reality that we can act and
know,—between that pragmatic illusion and on the other side of creative
Maya the lonely Absolute featureless and inexpressible. But for the Gita
absolute Brahman is also supreme Purusha, and Purusha is always conscious
Soul, though its highest consciousness, its superconsciousness, if we will,—as,
one may add, its lowest which we call the Inconscient,—is something very
different from our mind consciousness to which alone we are accustomed to
give the name. There is in that highest superconscience a highest truth and
dharma of immortality, a greatest divine way of being, a way of the eternal
and infinite. That eternal way of existence and divine manner of being exists
already in the eternity of the Purushottama, but we are now attempting to
create it here too in our becoming by Yoga; our endeavour is to become the
Divine, to be as He, \s{madbh\=ava}. That also depends on \s{\'sraddh\=a}. It is
by an act of our conscious substance and a belief in its truth, an inmost will to
live it or be it that we come by it; but this does not mean that it does not
already exist beyond us. Though it may not exist for our outward mind until
we see and create ourselves anew into it, it is still there in the Eternal and we
may say even that it is already there in our own secret self; for in us also, in
our depths the Purushottama always is. Our growing into that, our creation of
it is his and its manifestation in us. All creation indeed since it proceeds from
the conscious substance of the Eternal, is a manifestation of him and
proceeds by a faith, acceptance, will to be in the originating consciousness,
Chit-Shakti.
\par We are concerned at present, however, not with the metaphysical issue,
but with the relation of this will or faith in our being to our possibility of
growth into the perfection of the divine nature. This power, this \s{\'sraddh\=a}
is in any case our basis. When we live, when we are and do according to our
desires, that
Page 483

is a persistent act of \s{\'sraddh\=a} belonging mostly to our vital and physical,
our tamasic and rajasic nature. And when we try to be, to live and to do
according to the Shastra, we proceed by a persistent act of \s{\'sraddh\=a}
which belongs, supposing it to be not a routine faith, to a sattwic tendency
that is constantly labouring to impose itself on our rajasic and tamasic parts.
When we leave both these things and try to be, to live and to do according to
some ideal or novel conception of truth of our own finding or our own
individual acceptance, that too is a persistent act of \s{\'sraddh\=a} which may
be dominated by any one of these three qualities that constantly govern our
every thought, will, feeling and act. And again when we try to be, to live and
to do according to the divine nature, then too we must proceed by a persistent
act of \s{\'sraddh\=a}, which must be according to the Gita the faith of the
sattwic nature when it culminates and is preparing to exceed its own
clear-cut limits. But all and any of these things implies some kinesis or
displacement of nature, all suppose an inner or outer or ordinarily both an
inner and an outer action. And what then will be the character of this action?
The Gita states three main elements of the work we have to do,
\s{kartavya\.m karma}, and these three are sacrifice, giving and askesis. For
when questioned by Arjuna on the difference between the outer and inner
renunciation, \s{sanny\=asa} and \s{ty\=aga}, Krishna insists that these three
things ought not to be renounced at all but ought altogether to be done, for
they are the work before us, \s{kartavya\.m karma}, and they purify the wise.
In other words these acts constitute the means of our perfection. But at the
same time they may be done unwisely or less wisely by the unwise. All
dynamic action may be reduced in its essential parts to these three elements.
For all dynamic action, all kinesis of the nature involves a voluntary or an
involuntary tapasya or askesis, an energism and concentration of our forces
or capacities or of some capacity which helps us to achieve, to acquire or to
become something, \s{tapas}. All action involves a giving of what we are or
have, an expenditure which is the price of that achievement, acquisition or
becoming, \s{d\=ana}. All action involves too a sacrifice to elemental or to
universal powers or to the supreme Master of our works. The question
Page 484

is whether we do these things inconsciently, passively, or at best with an
unintelligent ignorant half-conscient will, or with an unwisely or perversely
conscient energism, or with a wisely conscient will rooted in knowledge, in
other words, whether our sacrifice, giving and askesis are tamasic, rajasic or
sattwic in nature.
\par For everything here, including physical things, partakes of this triple
character. Our food, for example, the Gita tells us, is either sattwic, rajasic or
tamasic according to its character and effect on the body. The sattwic
temperament in the mental and physical body turns naturally to the things that
increase the life, increase the inner and outer strength, nourish at once the
mental, vital and physical force and increase the pleasure and satisfaction and
happy condition of mind and life and body, all that is succulent and soft and
firm and satisfying. The rajasic temperament prefers naturally food that is
violently sour, pungent, hot, acrid, rough and strong and burning, the aliments
that increase ill-health and the distempers of the mind and body. The tamasic
temperament takes a perverse pleasure in cold, impure, stale, rotten or
tasteless food or even accepts like the animals the remnants half-eaten by
others. All-pervading is the principle of the three gunas. The gunas apply at
the other end in the same way to the things of the mind and spirit, to sacrifice,
giving and askesis, and the Gita distinguishes under each of these three heads
between the three kinds in the customary terms of these things as they were
formulated by the symbolism of the old Indian culture. But, remembering the
very wide sense which the Gita itself gives to the idea of sacrifice, we may
well enlarge the surface meaning of these hints and open them to a freer
significance. And it will be convenient to take them in the reverse order, from
tamas to sattwa, since we are considering how we go upward out of our
lower nature through a certain sattwic culmination and self-exceeding to a
divine nature and action beyond the three gunas.
\par The tamasic sacrifice is work which is done without faith, without, that is
to say, any full conscious idea and acceptance and will towards the thing
Nature yet compels us to execute. It is
Page 485

done mechanically, because the act of living demands it, because it comes in
our way, because others do it, to avoid some other greater difficulty which
may arise from not doing it, or from any other tamasic motive. And it is apt to
be done, if we have in the full this kind of temperament, carelessly,
perfunctorily, in the wrong way. It will not be performed by the \s{vidhi} or
right rule of the Shastra, will not be led in its steps according to the right
method laid down by the art and science of life and the true science of the
thing to be done. There will be no giving of food in the sacrifice,—and that
act in the Indian ritual is symbolic of the element of helpful giving inherent in
every action that is real sacrifice, the indispensable giving to others, the
fruitful help to others, to the world, without which our action becomes a
wholly self-regarding thing and a violation of the true universal law of
solidarity and interchange. The work will be done without the dakshina, the
much-needed giving or self-giving to the leaders of the sacrificial action,
whether to the outward guide and helper of our work or to the veiled or
manifest godhead within us. It will be done without the mantra, without the
dedicating thought which is the sacred body of our will and knowledge lifted
upwards to the godheads we serve by our sacrifice. The tamasic man does
not offer his sacrifice to the gods, but to inferior elemental powers or to those
grosser spirits behind the veil who feed upon his works and dominate his life
with their darkness.
\par The rajasic man offers his sacrifice to lower godheads or to perverse
powers, the Yakshas, the keepers of wealth, or to the Asuric and the
Rakshasic forces. His sacrifice may be performed outwardly according to
the Shastra, but its motive is ostentation, pride or a strong lust after the fruit
of his action, a vehement demand for the reward of his works. All work
therefore that proceeds from violent or egoistic personal desire or from an
arrogant will intent to impose itself on the world for personal objects is of the
rajasic nature, even if it mask itself with the insignia of the light, even if it be
done outwardly as a sacrifice. Although it is ostensibly given to God or to the
gods, it remains essentially an Asuric action. It is the inner state, motive and
Page 486

direction which give their value to our works, and not merely the apparent
outer direction, the divine names we may call to sanction them or even the
sincere intellectual belief which seems to justify us in the performance.
Wherever there is a dominating egoism in our acts, there our work becomes
a rajasic sacrifice. The true sattwic sacrifice on the other hand is
distinguished by three signs that are the quiet seal of its character. First, it is
dictated by the effective truth, executed according to the \s{vidhi}, the right
principle, the exact method and rule, the just rhythm and law of our works,
their true functioning, their dharma; that means that the reason and
enlightened will are the guides and determinants of their steps and their
purpose. Secondly, it is executed with a mind concentrated and fixed on the
idea of the thing to be done as a true sacrifice imposed on us by the divine
law that governs our life and therefore performed out of a high inner
obligation or imperative truth and without desire for the personal fruit,—the
more impersonal the motive of the action and the temperament of the force
put out in it, the more sattwic is its nature. And finally it is offered to the gods
without any reservation; it is acceptable to the divine powers by whom—for
they are his masks and personalities—the Master of existence governs the
universe.
\par This sattwic sacrifice comes then very near to the ideal and leads
directly towards the kind of action demanded by the Gita; but it is not the last
and highest ideal, it is not yet the action of the perfected man who lives in the
divine nature. For it is carried out as a fixed dharma, and it is offered as a
sacrifice or service to the gods, to some partial power or aspect of the Divine
manifested in ourselves or in the universe. Work done with a disinterested
religious faith or selflessly for humanity or impersonally from devotion to the
Right or the Truth is of this nature, and action of that kind is necessary for
our perfection; for it purifies our thought and will and our natural substance.
The culmination of the sattwic action at which we have to arrive is of a still
larger and freer kind; it is the high last sacrifice offered by us to the supreme
Divine in his integral being and with a seeking for the Purushottama or with
the vision of Vasudeva in all that
Page 487

is, the action done impersonally, universally, for the good of the world, for the
fulfilment of the divine will in the universe. That culmination leads to its own
transcending, to the immortal Dharma. For then comes a freedom in which
there is no personal action at all, no sattwic rule of dharma, no limitation of
Shastra; the inferior reason and will are themselves overpassed and it is not
they but a higher wisdom that dictates and guides the work and commands its
objective. There is no question of personal fruit; for the will that works is not
our own but a supreme Will of which the soul is the instrument. There is no
self-regarding and no selflessness; for the Jiva, the eternal portion of the
Divine, is united with the highest Self of his existence and he and all are one
in that Self and Spirit. There is no personal action, for all actions are given up
to the Master of our works and it is he that does the action through the
divinised Prakriti. There is no sacrifice,—unless we can say that the Master
of sacrifice is offering the works of his energy in the Jiva to himself in his
own cosmic form. This is the supreme self-surpassing state arrived at by the
action that is sacrifice, this the perfection of the soul that has come to its full
consciousness in the divine nature.
\par Tamasic tapasya is that which is pursued under a clouded and deluded
idea hard and obstinate in its delusion, maintained by an ignorant faith in some
cherished falsehood, performed with effort and suffering imposed on oneself
in pursuit of some narrow and vulgar egoistic object empty of relation to any
true or great aim or else with a concentration of the energy in a will to do
hurt to others. That which makes this kind of energism tamasic is not any
principle of inertia, for inertia is foreign to tapasya, but a darkness in the mind
and nature, a vulgar narrowness and ugliness in the doing or a brutish instinct
or desire in the aim or in the motive feeling. Rajasic energisms of askesis are
those which are undertaken to get honour and worship from men, for the
sake of personal distinction and outward glory and greatness or from some
other of the many motives of egoistic will and pride. This kind of askesis is
devoted to fleeting particular objects which add nothing to the heavenward
growth and perfection of the soul; it is a thing without fixed
Page 488

and helpful principle, an energy bound up with changeful and passing
occasion and itself of that nature. Or even if there is ostensibly a more
inward and noble object and the faith and will are of a higher kind, yet if any
kind of arrogance or pride or any great strength of violent self-will or desire
enters into the askesis or if it drives some violent, lawless or terrible action
contrary to the Shastra, opposed to the right rule of life and works and
afflicting to oneself and to others, or if it is of the nature of self-torture and
hurts the mental, vital and physical elements or violates the God within us
who is seated in the inner subtle body, then too it is an unwise, an Asuric, a
rajasic or rajaso-tamasic tapasya.
\par Sattwic tapasya is that which is done with a highest enlightened faith, as
a duty deeply accepted or for some ethical or spiritual or other higher reason
and with no desire for any external or narrowly personal fruit in the action. It
is of the character of self-discipline and asks for self-control and a
harmonising of one's nature. The Gita describes three kinds of sattwic
askesis. First comes the physical, the askesis of the outward act; under this
head are especially mentioned worship and reverence of those deserving
reverence, cleanness of the person, the action and the life, candid dealing,
sexual purity and avoidance of killing and injury to others. Next is askesis of
speech, and that consists in the study of Scripture, kind, true and beneficent
speech and a careful avoidance of words that may cause fear, sorrow and
trouble to others. Finally there is the askesis of mental and moral perfection,
and that means the purifying of the whole temperament, gentleness and a
clear and calm gladness of mind, self-control and silence. Here comes in all
that quiets or disciplines the rajasic and egoistic nature and all that replaces it
by the happy and tranquil principle of good and virtue. This is the askesis of
the sattwic dharma so highly prized in the system of the ancient Indian
culture. Its greater culmination will be a high purity of the reason and will, an
equal soul, a deep peace and calm, a wide sympathy and preparation of
oneness, a reflection of the inner soul's divine gladness in the mind, life and
body. There at that lofty point the ethical is already passing away
Page 489

into the spiritual type and character. And this culmination too can be made to
transcend itself, can be raised into a higher and freer light, can pass away
into the settled godlike energy of the supreme nature. And what will remain
then will be the spirit's immaculate Tapas, a highest will and luminous force in
all the members acting in a wide and solid calm and a deep and pure spiritual
delight, Ananda. There will then be no farther need of askesis, no tapasya,
because all is naturally and easily divine, all is that Tapas. There will be no
separate labour of the lower energism, because the energy of Prakriti will
have found its true source and base in the transcendent will of the
Purushottama. Then, because of this high initiation, the acts of this energy on
the lower planes also will proceed naturally and spontaneously from an innate
perfect will and by an inherent perfect guidance. There will be no limitation
by any of the present dharmas; for there will be a free action far above the
rajasic and tamasic nature, but also far beyond the too careful and narrow
limits of the sattwic rule of action.
\par As with tapasya, all giving also is of an ignorant tamasic, an ostentatious
rajasic or a disinterested and enlightened sattwic character. The tamasic gift
is offered ignorantly with no consideration of the right conditions of time,
place and object; it is a foolish, inconsiderate and in reality a self-regarding
movement, an ungenerous and ignoble generosity, the gift offered without
sympathy or true liberality, without regard for the feelings of the recipient and
despised by him even in the acceptance. The rajasic kind of giving is that
which is done with regret, unwillingness or violence to oneself or with a
personal and egoistic object or in the hope of a return of some kind from
whatever quarter or a corresponding or greater benefit to oneself from the
receiver. The sattwic way of giving is to bestow with right reason and
goodwill and sympathy in the right conditions of time and place and on the
right recipient who is worthy or to whom the gift can be really helpful. Its act
is performed for the sake of the giving and the beneficence, without any view
to a benefit already done or yet to be done to oneself by the receiver of the
benefit and without any personal object in the action.
Page 490

The culmination of the sattwic way of \s{d\=ana} will bring into the action an
increasing element of that wide self-giving to others and to the world and to
God, \s{\=atma-d\=ana}, \s{\=atma-samarpa\,na}, which is the high consecration of
the sacrifice of works enjoined by the Gita. And the transcendence in the
divine nature will be a greatest completeness of self-offering founded on the
largest meaning of existence. All this manifold universe comes into birth and
is constantly maintained by God's giving of himself and his powers and the
lavish outflow of his self and spirit into all these existences; universal being,
says the Veda, is the sacrifice of the Purusha. All the action of the perfected
soul will be even such a constant divine giving of itself and its powers, an
outflowing of the knowledge, light, strength, love, joy, helpful shakti which it
possesses in the Divine and by his influence and effluence on all around it
according to their capacity of reception or on all this world and its creatures.
That will be the complete result of the complete self-giving of the soul to the
Master of our existence.
\par The Gita closes this chapter with what seems at first sight a recondite
utterance. The formula OM, Tat, Sat, is, it says, the triple definition of the
Brahman, by whom the Brahmanas, the Vedas and sacrifices were created
of old and in it resides all their significance. Tat, That, indicates the Absolute.
Sat indicates the supreme and universal existence in its principle. OM is the
symbol of the triple Brahman, the outward-looking, the inward or subtle and
the superconscient causal Purusha. Each letter A, U, M indicates one of
these three in ascending order and the syllable as a whole brings out the
fourth state, Turiya, which rises to the Absolute. OM is the initiating syllable
pronounced at the outset as a benedictory prelude and sanction to all act of
sacrifice, all act of giving and all act of askesis; it is a reminder that our work
should be made an expression of the triple Divine in our inner being and
turned towards him in the idea and motive. The seekers of liberation indeed
do these actions without desire of fruit and only with the idea, feeling,
Ananda of the absolute Divine behind their nature. It is that which they seek
by this purity and impersonality in their works, this high desirelessness, this
vast emptiness of ego and plenitude of Spirit. Sat means
Page 491

good and it means existence. Both these things, the principle of good and the
principle of reality, must be there behind all the three kinds of action. All good
works are Sat, for they prepare the soul for the higher reality of our being; all
firm abiding in sacrifice, giving and askesis and all works done with that
central view, as sacrifice, as giving, as askesis, are Sat, for they build the
basis for the highest truth of our spirit. And because \s{\'sraddh\=a} is the
central principle of our existence, any of these things done without
\s{\'sraddh\=a} is a falsity and has no true meaning or true substance on earth or
beyond, no reality, no power to endure or create in life here or after the
mortal life in greater regions of our conscious spirit. The soul's faith, not a
mere intellectual belief, but its concordant will to know, to see, to believe and
to do and be according to its vision and knowledge, is that which determines
by its power the measure of our possibilities of becoming, and it is this faith
and will turned in all our inner and outer self, nature and action towards all
that is highest, most divine, most real and eternal that will enable us to reach
the supreme perfection.
Page 492

\par
\HN XIX
\par
\ht The Gunas, Mind and Works
\note{Gita, XVIII. 1-39.}
\par\drop The Gita has not yet completed its analysis of action in the light of
this fundamental idea of the three gunas and the transcendence of them by a
self-exceeding culmination of the highest sattwic discipline. Faith,
\s{\'sraddh\=a}, the will to believe and to be, know, live and enact the Truth that
we have seen is the principal factor, the indispensable force behind a
self-developing action, most of all behind the growth of the soul by works into
its full spiritual stature. But there are also the mental powers, the instruments
and the conditions which help to constitute the momentum, direction and
character of the activity and are therefore of importance for a full
understanding of this psychological discipline. The Gita enters into a summary
psychological analysis of these things before it proceeds to its great finale, the
culmination of all it teaches, the highest secret which is that of a spiritual
exceeding of all dharmas, a divine transcendence. And we have to follow it in
its brief descriptions, summarily, expanding just enough to seize fully the main
idea; for these are secondary things, but yet each of great consequence in its
own place and for its own purpose. It is their action cast in the type of the
gunas that we have to bring out from the brief descriptions in the text; the
nature of the culmination of any or each of them beyond the gunas will
automatically follow from the character of the general transcendence.
\par This part of the subject is introduced by a last question of Arjuna
regarding the principle of Sannyasa and the principle of Tyaga and their
difference. The frequent harping, the reiterated emphasis of the Gita on this
crucial distinction has been amply justified by the subsequent history of the
later Indian mind, its
Page 493

constant confusion of these two very different things and its strong bent
towards belittling any activity of the kind taught by the Gita as at best only a
preliminary to the supreme inaction of Sannyasa. As a matter of fact, when
people talk of Tyaga, of renunciation, it is always the physical renunciation of
the world which they understand by the word or at least on which they lay
emphasis, while the Gita takes absolutely the opposite view that the real
Tyaga has action and living in the world as its basis and not a flight to the
monastery, the cave or the hill-top. The real Tyaga is action with a
renunciation of desire and that too is the real Sannyasa.
\par The liberating activity of the sattwic self-discipline must no doubt be
pervaded by a spirit of renunciation,—that is an essential element: but what
renunciation and in what manner of the spirit? Not the renunciation of work
in the world, not any outward asceticism or any ostentation of a visible giving
up of enjoyment, but a renunciation, a leaving, \s{ty\=aga}, of vital desire and
ego, a total laying aside, \s{sanny\=asa}, of the separate personal life of the
desire soul and ego-governed mind and rajasic vital nature. That is the true
condition for entering into the heights of Yoga whether through the
impersonal self and Brahmic oneness or through universal Vasudeva or
inwardly into the supreme Purushottama. More conventionally taken,
Sannyasa in the standing terminology of the sages means the physical
depositing or laying aside of desirable actions: Tyaga—this is the Gita's
distinction—is the name given by the wise to a mental and spiritual
renunciation, an entire abandonment of all attached clinging to the fruit of our
works, to the action itself or to its personal initiation or rajasic impulse. In that
sense Tyaga, not Sannyasa, is the better way. It is not the desirable actions
that must be laid aside, but the desire which gives them that character has to
be put away from us. The fruit of the action may come in the dispensation of
the Master of works, but there is to be no egoistic demand for that as a
reward and condition of doing works. Or the fruit may not at all come and
still the work has to be performed as the thing to be done, \s{kartavya\.m
karma}, the thing which the Master within demands
Page 494

of us. The success, the failure are in his hands and he will regulate them
according to his omniscient will and inscrutable purpose. Action, all action has
indeed to be given up in the end, not physically by abstention, by immobility,
by inertia, but spiritually to the Master of our being by whose power alone
can any action be accomplished. There has to be a renunciation of the false
idea of ourselves as the doer; for in reality it is the universal Shakti that
works through our personality and our ego. The spiritual transference of all
our works to the Master and his Shakti is the real Sannyasa in the teaching of
the Gita.
\par The question still arises, what works are to be done? Those even who
stand for a final physical renunciation are not at one in this difficult matter.
Some would have it that all works must be excised from our life, as if that
were possible. But it is not possible so long as we are in the body and alive;
nor can salvation consist in reducing our active selves by trance to the lifeless
immobility of the clod and the pebble. The silence of Samadhi does not
abrogate the difficulty, for as soon as the breath comes again into the body,
we are once more in action and have toppled down from the heights of this
salvation by spiritual slumber. But the true salvation, the release by an inner
renunciation of the ego and union with the Purushottama remains steady in
whatever state, persists in this world or out of it or in whatever world or out
of all world, is self-existent, \s{sarvath\=a vartam\=ano'pi}, and does not depend
upon inaction or action. What then are the actions to be done? The
thoroughgoing ascetic answer, not noted by the Gita—it was perhaps not
altogether current at the time—might be that solely begging, eating and
meditation are to be permitted among voluntary activities and otherwise only
the necessary actions of the body. But the more liberal and comprehensive
solution was evidently to continue the three most sattwic activities, sacrifice,
giving and askesis. And these certainly are to be done, says the Gita, for they
purify the wise. But more generally, and understanding these three things in
their widest sense, it is the rightly regulated action, \s{niyata\.m karma}, that
has to be done, action regulated by the Shastra, the
Page 495

science and art of right knowledge, right works, right living, or regulated by
the essential nature, \s{svabh\=ava-niyata\.m karma}, or, finally and best of all,
regulated by the will of the Divine within and above us. The last is the true
and only action of the liberated man, \s{muktasya karma}. To renounce these
works is not a right movement—the Gita lays that down plainly and
trenchantly in the end, \s{niyatasya tu sanny\=asa\,h karma\,no nopapadyate}. To
renounce them from an ignorant confidence in the sufficiency of that
withdrawal for the true liberation is a tamasic renunciation. The gunas follow
us, we see, into the renunciation of works as well as into works. A
renunciation with attachment to inaction, \s{sa\.ngo} \s{akarma\,ni}, would be
equally a tamasic withdrawal. And to give them up because they bring
sorrow or are a trouble to the flesh and a weariness to the mind or in the
feeling that all is vanity and vexation of spirit, is a rajasic renunciation and
does not bring the high spiritual fruit; that too is not the true Tyaga. It is a
result of intellectual pessimism or vital weariness, it has its roots in ego. No
freedom can come from a renunciation governed by this self-regarding
principle.
\par The sattwic principle of renunciation is to withdraw not from action, but
from the personal demand, the ego factor behind it. It is to do works not
dictated by desire but by the law of right living or by the essential nature, its
knowledge, its ideal, its faith in itself and the Truth it sees, its \s{\'sraddh\=a}. Or
else, on a higher spiritual plane, they are dictated by the will of the Master
and done with the mind in Yoga, without any personal attachment either to
the action or to the fruit of the action. There must be a complete renunciation
of all desire and of all self-regarding egoistic choice and impulse and finally of
that much subtler egoism of the will which either says, “The work is mine, I
am the doer”, or even “The work is God's, but I am the doer.” There must be
no attachment to pleasant, desirable, lucrative or successful work and no
doing of it because it has that nature; but that kind of work too has to be
done,—done totally, selflessly, with the assent of the spirit,—when it is the
action demanded from above and from within us, \s{kartavya\.m}
Page 496

\s{karma}. There must be no aversion to unpleasant, undesirable or
ungratifying action or work that brings or is likely to bring with it suffering,
danger, harsh conditions, inauspicious consequences; for that too has to be
accepted, totally, selflessly, with a deep understanding of its need and
meaning, when it is the work that should be done, \s{kartavya\.m karma}. The
wise man puts away the shrinkings and hesitations of the desire-soul and the
doubts of the ordinary human intelligence, that measure by little personal,
conventional or otherwise limited standards. He follows in the light of the full
sattwic mind and with the power of an inner renunciation lifting the soul to
impersonality, towards God, towards the universal and eternal the highest
ideal law of his nature or the will of the Master of works in his secret spirit.
He will not do action for the sake of any personal result or for any reward in
this life or with any attachment to success, profit or consequence: neither will
his works be undertaken for the sake of a fruit in the invisible hereafter or
ask for a reward in other births or in worlds beyond us, the prizes for which
the half-baked religious mind hungers. The three kinds of result, pleasant,
unpleasant and mixed, in this or other worlds, in this or another life are for the
slaves of desire and ego; these things do not cling to the free spirit. The
liberated worker who has given up his works by the inner sannyasa to a
greater Power is free from Karma. Action he will do, for some kind of
action, less or more, small or great, is inevitable, natural, right for the
embodied soul,—action is part of the divine law of living, it is the high
dynamics of the spirit. The essence of renunciation, the true Tyaga, the true
Sannyasa is not any rule of thumb of inaction but a disinterested soul, a
selfless mind, the transition from ego to the free impersonal and spiritual
nature. The spirit of this inner renunciation is the first mental condition of the
highest culminating sattwic discipline.
\par The Gita then speaks of the five causes or indispensable requisites for
the accomplishment of works as laid down by the Sankhya. These five are,
first, the frame of body, life and mind which are the basis or standing-ground
of the soul in Nature, \s{adhi\,s\,th\=ana}, next, the doer, \s{kart\=a}, third, the
various
Page 497

instrumentation{} of Nature, \s{kara\,na}, fourth, the many kinds of effort
which make up the force of action, \s{ce\,s\,t\=a\,h}, and last, Fate, \s{daivam},
that is to say, the influence of the Power or powers other than the human
factors, other than the visible mechanism of Nature, that stand behind these
and modify the work and dispose its fruits in the steps of act and
consequence. These five elements make up among them all the efficient
causes, \s{k\=ara\,na}, that determine the shaping and outcome of whatever
work man undertakes with mind and speech and body.
\par The doer is ordinarily supposed to be our surface personal ego, but that
is the false idea of the understanding that has not arrived at knowledge. The
ego is the ostensible doer, but the ego and its will are creations and
instruments of Nature with which the ignorant understanding wrongly
identifies our self and they are not the only determinants even of human
action, much less of its turn and consequence. When we are liberated from
ego, our real self behind comes forward, impersonal and universal, and it sees
in its self-vision of unity with the universal Spirit universal Nature as the doer
of the work and the Divine Will behind as the master of universal Nature.
Only so long as we have not this knowledge, are we bound by the character
of the ego and its will as the doer and do good and evil and have the
satisfaction of our tamasic, rajasic or sattwic nature. But once we live in this
greater knowledge, the character and consequences of the work can make
no difference to the freedom of the spirit. The work may be outwardly a
terrible action like this great battle and slaughter of Kurukshetra; but although
the liberated man takes his part in the struggle and though he slay all these
peoples, he slays no man and he is not bound by his work, because the work
is that of the Master of the Worlds and it is he who has already slain in his
hidden omnipotent will all these armies. This work of destruction was needed
that humanity might move forward to another creation and a new purpose,
might get rid as in a fire of its past karma of unrighteousness and oppression
and injustice and move towards a kingdom of the Dharma. The liberated man
does all his appointed work as the living instrument one in spirit with
Page 498

the universal Spirit. And knowing that all this must be and looking beyond the
outward appearance he acts not for self but for God and man and the human
and cosmic order,
\note{The cosmic order comes into question, because the triumph of the
Asura in humanity means to that extent the triumph of the Asura in the
balance of the world-forces.} not in fact himself acting, but conscious of the
presence and power of the divine Force in his deeds and their issue. He
knows that the supreme Shakti is doing in his mental, vital and physical body,
\s{adhi\,s\,th\=ana}, as the sole doer the thing appointed by a Fate which is in
truth not Fate, not a mechanical dispensation, but the wise and all-seeing Will
that is at work behind human Karma. This “terrible work” on which the
whole teaching of the Gita turns, is an extreme example of action
inauspicious in appearance, \s{aku\'salam}, though a great good lies beyond
the appearance. Impersonally has it to be done by the divinely appointed man
for the holding together of the world purpose, \s{loka-sa\.ngrah\=artham},
without personal aim or desire, because it is the appointed service.
\par It is clear then that the work is not the sole thing that matters; the
knowledge in which we do works makes an immense spiritual difference.
There are three things, says the Gita, which go to constitute the mental
impulsion to works, and they are the knowledge in our will, the object of
knowledge and the knower; and into the knowledge there comes always the
working of the three gunas. It is this element of the gunas that makes all the
difference to our view of the thing known and to the spirit in which the
knower does his work. The tamasic ignorant knowledge is a small and
narrow, a lazy or dully obstinate way of looking at things which has no eye
for the real nature of the world or of the thing done or its field or the act or its
conditions. The tamasic mind does not look for real cause and effect, but
absorbs itself in one movement or one routine with an obstinate attachment to
it, can see nothing but the little section of personal activity before its eyes and
does not know in fact what it is doing but blindly lets natural impulsion work
out through its deed results of which it has no conception, foresight or
comprehending intelligence. The
Page 499

rajasic knowledge is that which sees the multiplicity of things only in their
separateness and variety of operation in all these existences and is unable to
discover a true principle of unity or rightly coordinate its will and action, but
follows the bent of ego and desire, the activity of its many-branching egoistic
will and various and mixed motive in response to the solicitation of internal
and environing impulsions and forces. This knowing is a jumble of sections of
knowledge, often inconsistent knowledge, put forcefully together by the mind
in order to make some kind of pathway through the confusion of our
half-knowledge and half-ignorance. Or else it is a restless kinetic multiple
action with no firm governing higher ideal and self-possessed law of true light
and power within it. The sattwic knowledge on the contrary sees existence
as one indivisible whole in all these divisions, one imperishable being in all
becomings; it masters the principle of its action and the relation of the
particular action to the total purpose of existence; it puts in the right place
each step of the complete process. At the highest top of knowledge this
seeing becomes the knowledge of the one spirit in the world, one in all these
many existences, of the one Master of all works, of the forces of cosmos as
expressions of the Godhead and of the work itself as the operation of his
supreme will and wisdom in man and his life and essential nature. The
personal will has come to be entirely conscious, illumined, spiritually awake,
and it lives and works in the One, obeys more and more perfectly his
supreme mandate and grows more and more a faultless instrument of his light
and power in the human person. The supreme liberated action arrives through
this culmination of the sattwic knowledge.
\par There are again three things, the doer, the instrument and the work done,
that hold the action together and make it possible. And here again it is the
difference of the gunas that determines the character of each of these
elements. The sattwic mind that seeks always for a right harmony and right
knowledge is the governing instrument of the sattwic man and moves all the
rest of the machine. An egoistic will of desire supported by the desire-soul is
the dominant instrument of the rajasic worker. An
Page 500

ignorant instinct or the unenlightened impulsion of the physical mind and the
crude vital nature is the chief instrumental force of the tamasic doer of
action. The instrument of the liberated man is a greater spiritual light and
power, far higher than the highest sattwic intelligence, and it works in him by
an enveloping descent from a supraphysical centre and uses as a clear
channel of its force a purified and receptive mind, life and body.
\par Tamasic action is that done with a confused, deluded and ignorant mind,
in mechanical obedience to the instincts, impulsions and unseeing ideas,
without regarding the strength or capacity or the waste and loss of blind
misapplied effort or the antecedent and consequence and right conditions of
the impulse, effort or labour. Rajasic action is that which a man undertakes
under the dominion of desire, with his eyes fixed on the work and its
hoped-for fruit and nothing else, or with an egoistic sense of his own
personality in the action, and it is done with inordinate effort, with a
passionate labour, with a great heaving and straining of the personal will to
get at the object of its desire. Sattwic action is that which a man does calmly
in the clear light of reason and knowledge and with an impersonal sense of
right or duty or the demand of an ideal, as the thing that ought to be done
whatever may be the result to himself in this world or another, a work
performed without attachment, without liking or disliking for its spur or its
drag, for the sole satisfaction of his reason and sense of right, of the lucid
intelligence and the enlightened will and the pure disinterested mind and the
high contented spirit. At the line of culmination of sattwa it will be
transformed and become a highest impersonal action dictated by the spirit
within us and no longer by the intelligence, an action moved by the highest
law of the nature, free from the lower ego and its light or heavy baggage and
from limitation even by best opinion, noblest desire, purest personal will or
loftiest mental ideal. There will be none of these impedimenta; in their place
there will stand a clear spiritual self-knowledge and illumination and an
imperative intimate sense of an infallible power that acts and of the work to
be done for the world and for the world's Master.
Page 501

\par The tamasic doer of action is one who does not put himself really into
the work, but acts with a mechanical mind, or obeys the most vulgar thought
of the herd, follows the common routine or is wedded to a blind error and
prejudice. He is obstinate in stupidity, stubborn in error and takes a foolish
pride in his ignorant doing; a narrow and evasive cunning replaces true
intelligence; he has a stupid and insolent contempt for those with whom he
has to deal, especially for wiser men and his betters. A dull laziness,
slowness, procrastination, looseness, want of vigour or of sincerity mark his
action. The tamasic man is ordinarily slow to act, dilatory in his steps, easily
depressed, ready soon to give up his task if it taxes his strength, his diligence
or his patience. The rajasic doer of action on the contrary is one eagerly
attached to the work, bent on its rapid completion, passionately desirous of
fruit and reward and consequence, greedy of heart, impure of mind, often
violent and cruel and brutal in the means he uses; he cares little whom he
injures or how much he injures others so long as he gets what he wants,
satisfies his passions and will, vindicates the claims of his ego. He is full of an
incontinent joy in success and bitterly grieved and stricken by failure. The
sattwic doer is free from all this attachment, this egoism, this violent strength
or passionate weakness; his is a mind and will unelated by success,
undepressed by failure, full of a fixed impersonal resolution, a calm rectitude
of zeal or a high and pure and selfless enthusiasm in the work that has to be
done. At and beyond the culmination of sattwa this resolution, zeal,
enthusiasm become the spontaneous working of the spiritual Tapas and at
last a highest soul-force, the direct God-Power, the mighty and steadfast
movement of a divine energy in the human instrument, the self-assured steps
of the Seer-will, the gnostic intelligence and with it the wide delight of the
free spirit in the works of the liberated nature.
\par The reason armed with the intelligent will works in man in whatever
manner or measure he may possess these human gifts and it is accordingly
right or perverted, clouded or luminous, narrow and small or large and wide
like the mind of its possessor. It is the understanding power of his nature,
\s{buddhi}, that
Page 502

chooses the work for him or, more often, approves and sets its sanction on
one or other among the many suggestions of his complex instincts, impulsions,
ideas and desires. It is that which determines for him what is right or wrong,
to be done or not to be done, Dharma or Adharma. And the persistence of
the will
\note{\s{dh\,rti}.} is that continuous force of mental Nature which sustains the
work and gives it consistence and persistence. Here again there is the
incidence of the gunas. The tamasic reason is a false, ignorant and darkened
instrument which chains us to see all things in a dull and wrong light, a cloud
of misconceptions, a stupid ignoring of the values of things and people. This
reason calls light darkness and darkness light, takes what is not the true law
and upholds it as the law, persists in the thing which ought not to be done and
holds it up to us as the one right thing to be done. Its ignorance is invincible
and its persistence of will is a persistence in the satisfaction and dull pride of
its ignorance. That is on its side of blind action; but it is pursued also by a
heavy stress of inertia and impotence, a persistence in dullness and sleep, an
aversion to mental change and progress, a dwelling on the fears and pains
and depressions of mind which deter us in our path or keep us to base, weak
and cowardly ways. Timidity, shirking, evasion, indolence, the justification by
the mind of its fears and false doubts and cautions and refusals of duty and
its lapses and turnings from the call of our higher nature, a safe following of
the line of least resistance so that there may be the least trouble and effort
and peril in the winning of the fruit of our labour,—rather no fruit or poor
result, it says, than a great and noble toil or a perilous and exacting endeavour
and adventure,—these are characteristics of the tamasic will and intelligence.
\par The rajasic understanding, when it does not knowingly choose error and
evil for the sake of the error and evil, can make distinctions between right
and wrong, between what should or should not be done, but not rightly, rather
with a pulling awry of their true measures and a constant distortion of values.
And
Page 503

this is because its reason and will are a reason of the ego and a will of desire,
and these powers misrepresent and distort the truth and the right to serve
their own egoistic purpose. It is only when we are free from ego and desire
and look steadily with a calm, pure, disinterested mind concerned only with
the truth and its sequences that we can hope to see things rightly and in their
just values. But the rajasic will fixes its persistent attention on the satisfaction
of its own attached clingings and desires in its pursuit of interest and pleasure
and of what it thinks or chooses to think right and justice, Dharma. Always it
is apt to put on these things the construction which will most flatter and justify
its desires and to uphold as right or legitimate the means which will best help
it to get the coveted fruits of its work and endeavour. That is the cause of
three fourths of the falsehood and misconduct of the human reason and will.
Rajas with its vehement hold on the vital ego is the great sinner and positive
misleader.
\par The sattwic understanding sees in its right place, right form, right
measure the movement of the world, the law of action and the law of
abstention from action, the thing that is to be done and the thing that is not to
be done, what is safe for the soul and what is dangerous, what is to be feared
and shunned and what is to be embraced by the will, what binds the spirit of
man and what sets it free. These are the things that it follows or avoids by
the persistence of its conscious will according to the degree of its light and
the stage of evolution it has reached in its upward ascent to the highest self
and Spirit. The culmination of this sattwic intelligence is found by a high
persistence of the aspiring buddhi when it is settled on what is beyond the
ordinary reason and mental will, pointed to the summits, turned to a steady
control of the senses and the life and a union by Yoga with man's highest
Self, the universal Divine, the transcendent Spirit. It is there that arriving
through the sattwic guna one can pass beyond the gunas, can climb beyond
the limitations of the mind and its will and intelligence and sattwa itself
disappear into that which is above the gunas and beyond this instrumental
nature. There the soul is enshrined in light and enthroned in firm union
Page 504

with the Self and Spirit and Godhead. Arrived upon that summit we can leave
the Highest to guide Nature in our members in the free spontaneity of a
divine action: for there there is no wrong or confused working, no element of
error or impotence to obscure or distort the luminous perfection and power of
the Spirit. All these lower conditions, laws, dharmas cease to have any hold
on us; the Infinite acts in the liberated man and there is no law but the
immortal truth and right of the free spirit, no Karma, no kind of bondage.
\par Harmony and order are the characteristic qualities of the sattwic mind
and temperament, quiet happiness, a clear and calm content and an inner
ease and peace. Happiness is indeed the one thing which is openly or
indirectly the universal pursuit of our human nature,—happiness or its
suggestion or some counterfeit of it, some pleasure, some enjoyment, some
satisfaction of the mind, the will, the passions or the body. Pain is an
experience our nature has to accept when it must, involuntarily as a
necessity, an unavoidable incident of universal Nature, or voluntarily as a
means to what we seek after, but not a thing desired for its own
sake,—except when it is so sought in perversity or with an ardour of
enthusiasm in suffering for some touch of fierce pleasure it brings or the
intense strength it engenders. But there are various kinds of happiness or
pleasure according to the guna which dominates in our nature. Thus the
tamasic mind can remain well-pleased in its indolence and inertia, its stupor
and sleep, its blindness and its error. Nature has armed it with the privilege of
a smug satisfaction in its stupidity and ignorance, its dim lights of the cave, its
inert contentment, its petty or base joys and its vulgar pleasures. Delusion is
the beginning of this satisfaction and delusion is its consequence; but still
there is given a dull, a by no means admirable but a sufficient pleasure in his
delusions to the dweller in the cave. There is a tamasic happiness founded in
inertia and ignorance.
\par The mind of the rajasic man drinks of a more fiery and intoxicating cup;
the keen, mobile, active pleasure of the senses and the body and the
sense-entangled or fierily kinetic will and intelligence are to him all the joy of
life and the very significance
Page 505

of living. This joy is nectar to the lips at the first touch, but there is a secret
poison in the bottom of the cup and after it the bitterness of disappointment,
satiety, fatigue, revolt, disgust, sin, suffering, loss, transience. And it must be
so because these pleasures in their external figure are not the things which
the spirit in us truly demands from life; there is something behind and beyond
the transience of the form, something that is lasting, satisfying, self-sufficient.
What the sattwic nature seeks, therefore, is the satisfaction of the higher
mind and the spirit and when it once gets this large object of its quest, there
comes in a clear, pure happiness of the soul, a state of fullness, an abiding
ease and peace. This happiness does not depend on outward things, but on
ourselves alone and on the flowering of what is best and most inward within
us. But it is not at first our normal possession; it has to be conquered by
self-discipline, a labour of the soul, a high and arduous endeavour. At first this
means much loss of habitual pleasure, much suffering and struggle, a poison
born of the churning of our nature, a painful conflict of forces, much revolt
and opposition to the change due to the ill-will of the members or the
insistence of vital movements, but in the end the nectar of immortality rises in
the place of this bitterness and as we climb to the higher spiritual nature we
come to the end of sorrow, the euthanasia of grief and pain. That is the
surpassing happiness which descends upon us at the point or line of
culmination of the sattwic discipline.
\par The self-exceeding of the sattwic nature comes when we get beyond the
great but still inferior sattwic pleasure, beyond the pleasures of mental
knowledge and virtue and peace to the eternal calm of the self and the
spiritual ecstasy of the divine oneness. That spiritual joy is no longer the
sattwic happiness, \s{sukham}, but the absolute Ananda. Ananda is the
secret delight from which all things are born, by which all is sustained in
existence and to which all can rise in the spiritual culmination. Only then can
it be possessed when the liberated man, free from ego and its desires, lives at
last one with his highest self, one with all beings and one with God in an
absolute bliss of the spirit.
Page 506

\par
\HN XX
\par
\ht Swabhava and Swadharma
\note{Gita, XVIII. 40-48.}
\par\drop It is then by a liberating development of the soul out of this lower
nature of the triple gunas into the supreme divine nature beyond the three
gunas that we can best arrive at spiritual perfection and freedom. And this
again can best be brought about by an anterior development of the
predominance of the highest sattwic quality to a point at which sattwa also is
overpassed, mounts beyond its own limitations and breaks up into a supreme
freedom, absolute light, serene power of the conscious spirit in which there is
no determination by conflicting gunas. A highest sattwic faith and aim
new-shaping what we are according to the highest mental conception of our
inner possibilities that we can form in the free intelligence, is changed by this
transition into a vision of our own real being, a spiritual self-knowledge. A
loftiest ideality or standard of dharma, a pursuit of the right law of our natural
existence, is transformed into a free assured self-existent perfection in which
all dependence on standards is transcended and the spontaneous law of the
immortal self and spirit displaces the lower rule of the instruments and
members. The sattwic mind and will change into that spiritual knowledge and
dynamic power of identical existence in which the whole nature puts off its
disguise and becomes a free self-expression of the godhead within it. The
sattwic doer becomes the Jiva in contact with his source, united with the
Purushottama; he is no longer the personal doer of the act, but a spiritual
channel of the works of the transcendent and universal Spirit. His natural
being transformed and illumined remains to be the instrument of a universal
and impersonal action, the bow of the divine Archer. What was sattwic
action becomes the free activity of the perfected nature in which there is no
longer any personal
Page 507

limitation, any tethering to this or that quality, any bondage of sin and virtue,
self and others or any but a supreme spiritual self-determination. That is the
culmination of works uplifted to the sole Divine Worker by a God-seeking
and spiritual knowledge.
\par But there is still an incidental question of great importance in the old
Indian system of culture and, even apart from that antique view, of
considerable general importance, on which we have had some passing
pronouncements already by the Gita and which now falls into its proper
place. All action on the normal level is determined by the gunas; the action
which is to be done, \s{kartavya\.m karma}, takes the triple form of giving,
askesis and sacrifice, and any or all of these three may assume the character
of any of the gunas. Therefore we have to proceed by the raising of these
things to the highest sattwic height of which they are capable and go yet
farther beyond to a largeness in which all works become a free self-giving,
an energy of the divine Tapas, a perpetual sacrament of the spiritual
existence. But this is a general law and all these considerations have been the
enunciation of quite general principles and refer indiscriminately to all actions
and to all men alike. All can eventually arrive by spiritual evolution to this
strong discipline, this large perfection, this highest spiritual state. But while
the general rule of mind and action is the same for all men, we see too that
there is a constant law of variation and each individual acts not only
according to the common laws of the human spirit, mind, will, life, but
according to his own nature; each man fulfils different functions or follows a
different bent according to the rule of his own circumstances, capacities, turn,
character, powers. What place is to be assigned to this variation, this
individual rule of nature in the spiritual discipline?
\par The Gita has laid some stress on this point and even assigned to it a
great preliminary importance. At the very start it has spoken of the nature,
rule and function of the Kshatriya as Arjuna's own law of action,
\s{svadharma};
\note{II. 31. \s{svadharmam api c\=avek\,sya}.} it has proceeded to lay it down
with a striking emphasis that one's own nature, rule,
Page 508

function should be observed and followed,—even if defective, it is better than
the well-performed rule of another's nature. Death in one's own law of
nature is better for a man than victory in an alien movement. To follow the
law of another's nature is dangerous to the soul,
\note{III. 35.} contradictory, as we may say, to the natural way of his
evolution, a thing mechanically imposed and therefore imported, artificial and
sterilising to one's growth towards the true stature of the spirit. What comes
out of the being is the right and healthful thing, the authentic movement, not
what is imposed on it from outside or laid on it by life's compulsions or the
mind's error. This swadharma is of four general kinds formulated outwardly
in the action of the four orders of the old Indian social culture,
\s{c\=aturvar\,nya}. That system corresponds, says the Gita, to a divine law, it
“was created by me according to the divisions of the gunas and
works,”—created from the beginning by the Master of existence. In other
words, there are four distinct orders of the active nature, or four fundamental
types of the soul in nature, \s{svabh\=ava}, and the work and proper function
of each human being corresponds to his type of nature. This is now finally
explained in preciser detail. The works of Brahmins, Kshatriyas, Vaishyas
and Shudras, says the Gita, are divided according to the qualities (\s{gu\,nas})
born of their own inner nature, spiritual temperament, essential character
(\s{svabh\=ava}). Calm, self-control, askesis, purity, long-suffering, candour,
knowledge, acceptance of spiritual truth are the work of the Brahmin, born of
his swabhava. Heroism, high spirit, resolution, ability, not fleeing in the battle,
giving, lordship (\s{\=i\'svara-bh\=ava}, the temperament of the ruler and leader)
are the natural work of the Kshatriya. Agriculture, cattle-keeping, trade
inclusive of the labour of the craftsman and the artisan are the natural work
of the Vaishya. All work of the character of service falls within the natural
function of the Shudra. A man, it goes on to say, who devotes himself to his
own natural work in life acquires spiritual perfection, not indeed by the mere
act itself, but if he does it with right knowledge and the right motive, if he
Page 509

can make it a worship of the Spirit of this creation and dedicate it sincerely to
the Master of the universe from whom is all impulse to action. All labour, all
action and function, whatever it be, can be consecrated by this dedication of
works, can convert the life into a self-offering to the Godhead within and
without us and is itself converted into a means of spiritual perfection. But a
work not naturally one's own, even though it may be well performed, even
though it may look better from the outside when judged by an external and
mechanical standard or may lead to more success in life, is still inferior as a
means of subjective growth precisely because it has an external motive and a
mechanical impulsion. One's own natural work is better, even if it looks from
some other point of view defective. One does not incur sin or stain when one
acts in the true spirit of the work and in agreement with the law of one's own
nature. All action in the three gunas is imperfect, all human work is subject to
fault, defect or limitation; but that should not make us abandon our own
proper work and natural function. Action should be rightly regulated action,
\s{niyata\.m karma}, but intrinsically one's own, evolved from within, in
harmony with the truth of one's being, regulated by the Swabhava,
\s{svabh\=ava-niyata\.m karma}.
\par What precisely is the intention of the Gita? Let us take it first in its more
outward meaning and consider the tinge given to the principle it enounces by
the ideas of the race and the time—the hue of the cultural environment, the
ancient significance. These verses and the earlier pronouncements of the
Gita on the same subject have been seized upon in current controversies on
the caste question and interpreted by some as a sanction of the present
system, used by others as a denial of the hereditary basis of caste. In point of
fact the verses in the Gita have no bearing on the existing caste system,
because that is a very different thing from the ancient social ideal of
\s{caturvar\,na}, the four clear-cut orders of the Aryan community, and in no
way corresponds with the description of the Gita. Agriculture, cattle-keeping
and trade of every kind are said here to be the work of the Vaishya; but in
the later system the majority of those concerned in trade and in
cattle-keeping, artisans, small craftsmen and others are
Page 510

actually classed as Shudras,—where they are not put altogether outside the
pale,—and, with some exceptions, the merchant class is alone and that too
not everywhere ranked as Vaishya. Agriculture, government and service are
the professions of all classes from the Brahmin down to the Shudra. And if
the economical divisions of function have been confounded beyond any
possibility of rectification, the law of the guna or quality is still less a part of
the later system. There all is rigid custom, \s{\=ac\=ara}, with no reference to the
need of the individual nature. If again we take the religious side of the
contention advanced by the advocates of the caste system, we can certainly
fasten no such absurd idea on the words of the Gita as that it is a law of a
man's nature that he shall follow without regard to his personal bent and
capacities the profession of his parents or his immediate or distant ancestors,
the son of a milkman be a milkman, the son of a doctor a doctor, the
descendants of shoemakers remain shoemakers to the end of measurable
time, still less that by doing so, by this unintelligent and mechanical repetition
of the law of another's nature without regard to his own individual call and
qualities a man automatically farthers his own perfection and arrives at
spiritual freedom. The Gita's words refer to the ancient system of
\s{caturvar\,na}, as it existed or was supposed to exist in its ideal
purity,—there is some controversy whether it was ever anything more than
an ideal or general norm more or less loosely followed in practice,—and it
should be considered in that connection alone. Here too there is considerable
difficulty as to the exact outward significance.
\par The ancient system of the four orders had a triple aspect; it took a social
and economic, a cultural and a spiritual appearance. On the economic side it
recognised four functions of the social man in the community, the religious
and intellectual, the political, the economic and the servile functions. There
are thus four kinds of work, the work of religious ministration, letters, learning
and knowledge, the work of government, politics, administration and war, the
work of production, wealth-making and exchange, the work of hired labour
and service. An endeavour was made to found and stabilise the whole
arrangement
Page 511

of society on the partition of these four functions among four clearly marked
classes. This system was not peculiar to India, but was with certain
differences the dominating feature of a stage of social evolution in other
ancient or mediaeval societies. The four functions are still inherent in the life
of all normal communities, but the clear divisions no longer exist anywhere.
The old system everywhere broke down and gave place to a more fluid order
or, as in India, to a confused and complex social rigidity and economic
immobility degenerating towards a chaos of castes. Along with this economic
division there existed the association of a cultural idea which gave to each
class its religious custom, its law of honour, ethical rule, suitable education
and training, type of character, family ideal and discipline. The facts of life
did not always correspond to the idea,—there is always a certain gulf found
between the mental ideal and the vital and physical practice,—but there was
a constant and strenuous endeavour to keep up as much as possible a real
correspondence. The importance of this attempt and of the cultural ideal and
atmosphere it created in the past training of the social man, can hardly be put
too high; but at the present day it has little more than a historical, a past and
evolutionary significance. Finally, wherever this system existed, it was given
more or less a religious sanction (more in the East, very little in Europe) and
in India a profounder spiritual use and significance. This spiritual significance
is the real kernel of the teaching of the Gita.
\par The Gita found this system in existence and its ideal in possession of the
Indian mind and it recognised and accepted both the ideal and system and its
religious sanction. “The fourfold order was created by me,” says Krishna,
“according to the divisions of quality and active function.” On the mere
strength of this phrase it cannot altogether be concluded that the Gita
regarded this system as an eternal and universal social order. Other ancient
authorities did not so regard it; rather they distinctly state that it did not exist
in the beginning and will collapse in a later age of the cycle. Still we may
understand from the phrase that the fourfold function of social man was
considered as normally inherent in the psychological and economic needs
Page 512

of every community and therefore a dispensation of the Spirit that expresses
itself in the human corporate and individual existence. The Gita's line is in
fact an intellectual rendering of the well-known symbol in the Vedic
Purusha-Sukta. But what then should be the natural basis and form of
practice of these functions? The practical basis in ancient times came to be
the hereditary principle. A man's social function and position were no doubt
determined originally, as they are still in freer, less closely ordered
communities by environment, occasion, birth and capacity; but as there set in
a more fixed stratification, his rank came practically to be regulated by birth
mainly or alone and in the later system of caste birth came to be the sole rule
of status. The son of a Brahmin is always a Brahmin in status, though he may
have nothing of the typical Brahmin qualities or character, no intellectual
training or spiritual experience or religious worth or knowledge, no connection
whatever with the right function of his class, no Brahminhood in his work and
no Brahminhood in his nature.
\par This was an inevitable evolution, because the external signs are the only
ones which are easily and conveniently determinable and birth was the most
handy and manageable in an increasingly mechanised, complex and
conventional social order. For a time the possible disparity between the
hereditary fiction and the individual's real inborn character and capacity was
made up or minimised by education and training: but eventually this effort
ceased to be sustained and the hereditary convention held absolute rule. The
ancient lawgivers, while recognising the hereditary practice, insisted that
quality, character and capacity were the one sound and real basis and that
without them the hereditary social status became an unspiritual falsehood
because it had lost its true significance. The Gita too, as always, founds its
thought on the inner significance. It speaks indeed in one verse of the work
born with a man, \s{sahaja\.m karma}; but this does not in itself imply a
hereditary basis. According to the Indian theory of rebirth, which the Gita
recognises, a man's inborn nature and course of life are essentially
determined by his own past lives, are the self-development already effected
by his past
Page 513

actions and mental and spiritual evolution and cannot depend solely on the
material factor of his ancestry, parentage, physical birth, which can only be of
subordinate moment, one effective sign perhaps, but not the dominant
principle. The word \s{sahaja} means that which is born with us, whatever is
natural, inborn, innate; its equivalent in all other passages is \s{svabh\=avaja}.
The work or function of a man is determined by his qualities, \s{karma} is
determined by \s{gu\,na}; it is the work born of his Swabhava, \s{svabh\=avaja\.m
karma}, and regulated by his Swabhava, \s{svabh\=ava-niyata\.m karma}. This
emphasis on an inner quality and spirit which finds expression in work,
function and action is the whole sense of the Gita's idea of Karma.
\par And from this emphasis on the inner truth and not on the outer form
arises the spiritual significance and power which the Gita assigns to the
following of the Swadharma. That is the really important bearing of the
passage. Too much has been made of its connection with the outer social
order, as if the object of the Gita were to support that for its own sake or to
justify it by a religio-philosophical theory. In fact it lays very little stress on
the external rule and a very great stress on the internal law which the Varna
system attempted to put into regulated outward practice. And it is on the
individual and spiritual value of this law and not on its communal and
economic or other social and cultural importance that the eye of the thought
is fixed in this passage. The Gita accepted the Vedic theory of sacrifice, but
gave it a profound turn, an inner, subjective and universal meaning, a spiritual
sense and direction which alters all its values. Here too and in the same way
it accepts the theory of the four orders of men, but gives to it a profound turn,
an inner, subjective and universal meaning, a spiritual sense and direction.
And immediately the idea behind the theory changes its values and becomes
an enduring and living truth not bound up with the transience of a particular
social form and order. What the Gita is concerned with is not the validity of
the Aryan social order now abolished or in a state of deliquescence,—if that
were all, its principle of the Swabhava and Swadharma would have no
permanent truth or value,—but the relation of
Page 514

a man's outward life to his inward being, the evolution of his action from his
soul and inner law of nature.
\par And we see in fact that the Gita itself indicates very clearly its intention
when it describes the work of the Brahmin and the Kshatriya not in terms of
external function, not defined as learning, priest-work and letters or
government, war and politics, but entirely in terms of internal character. The
language reads a little curiously to our ear. Calm, self-control, askesis, purity,
long-suffering, candour, knowledge, acceptance and practice of spiritual truth
would not ordinarily be described as a man's function, work or life
occupation. Yet this is precisely what the Gita means and says,—that these
things, their development, their expression in conduct, their power to cast into
form the law of the sattwic nature are the real work of the Brahmin: learning,
religious ministration and the other outer functions are only its most suitable
field, a favourable means of this inner development, its appropriate
self-expression, its way of fixing itself into firmness of type and externalised
solidity of character. War, government, politics, leadership and rule are a
similar field and means for the Kshatriya; but his real work is the
development, the expression in conduct, the power to cast into form and
dynamic rhythm of movement the law of the active battling royal or warrior
spirit. The work of the Vaishya and Shudra is expressed in terms of external
function, and this opposite turn may have some significance. For the
temperament moved to production and wealth-getting or limited in the circle
of labour and service, the mercantile and the servile mind, are usually turned
outward, more occupied with the external values of their work than its power
for character, and this disposition is not so favourable to a sattwic or spiritual
action of the nature. That too is the reason why a commercial and industrial
age or a society preoccupied with the idea of work and labour creates around
it an atmosphere more favourable to the material than the spiritual life, more
adapted to vital efficiency than to the subtler perfection of the high-reaching
mind and spirit. Nevertheless, this kind of nature too and its functions have
their inner significance, their spiritual value and can be made a means and
power for
Page 515

perfection. As has been said elsewhere, not alone the Brahmin with his ideal
of spirituality, ethical purity and knowledge and the Kshatriya with his ideal of
nobility, chivalry and high character, but the wealth-seeking Vaishya, the
toil-imprisoned Shudra, woman with her narrow, circumscribed and subject
life, the very outcaste born from a womb of sin, \s{p\=apayonaya\,h}, can by this
road rise at once towards the highest inner greatness and spiritual freedom,
towards perfection, towards the liberation and fulfilment of the divine element
in the human being.
\par Three propositions suggest themselves even at the first view and may be
taken as implicit in all that the Gita says in this passage. First, all action must
be determined from within because each man has in him something his own,
some characteristic principle and inborn power of his nature. That is the
efficient power of his spirit, that creates the dynamic form of his soul in
nature and to express and perfect it by action, to make it effective in capacity
and conduct and life is his work, his true Karma: that points him to the right
way of his inner and outer living and is the right starting-point for his farther
development. Next, there are broadly four types of nature each with its
characteristic function and ideal rule of work and character and the type
indicates the man's proper field and should trace for him his just circle of
function in his outer social existence. Finally, whatever work a man does, if
done according to the law of his being, the truth of his nature, can be turned
Godwards and made an effective means of spiritual liberation and perfection.
The first and last of these propositions are suggestions of an evident truth and
justice. The ordinary way of man's individual and social living seems indeed
to be a contradiction of these principles; for certainly we bear a terrible
weight of external necessity, rule and law and our need for self-expression,
for the development of our true person, our real soul, our inmost
characteristic law of nature in life is at every turn interfered with, thwarted,
forced from its course, given a very poor chance and scope by environmental
influences. Life, State, society, family, all surrounding powers seem to be in a
league to lay their yoke on our spirit, compel us into their moulds, impose on
us their mechanical interest and rough
Page 516

immediate convenience. We become parts of a machine; we are not, are
hardly allowed to be men in the true sense, \s{manu\,sya}, \s{puru\,sa}, souls,
minds, free children of the spirit empowered to develop the highest
characteristic perfection of our being and make it our means of service to the
race. It would seem that we are not what we make ourselves, but what we
are made. Yet the more we advance in knowledge, the more the truth of the
Gita's rule is bound to appear. The child's education ought to be an
outbringing of all that is best, most powerful, most intimate and living in his
nature; the mould into which the man's action and development ought to run
is that of his innate quality and power. He must acquire new things, but he
will acquire them best, most vitally on the basis of his own developed type
and inborn force. And so too the functions of a man ought to be determined
by his natural turn, gift and capacities. The individual who develops freely in
this manner will be a living soul and mind and will have a much greater power
for the service of the race. And we are able now to see more clearly that this
rule is true not only of the individual but of the community and the nation, the
group soul, the collective man. The second proposition of the four types and
their functions is more open to dispute. It may be said that it is too simple and
positive, that it takes no sufficient account of the complexity of life and the
plasticity of human nature, and, whatever the theory or its intrinsic merits, the
outward social application must lead precisely to that tyranny of a mechanical
rule which is the flat contradiction of all law of Swadharma. But it has a
profounder meaning under the surface which gives it a less disputable value.
And even if we reject it, the third proposition will yet stand in its general
significance. Whatever a man's work and function in life, he can, if it is
determined from within or if he is allowed to make it a self-expression of his
nature, turn it into a means of growth and of a greater inner perfection. And
whatever it be, if he performs his natural function in the right spirit, if he
enlightens it by the ideal mind, if he turns its action to the uses of the
Godhead within, serves with it the Spirit manifested in the universe or makes
it a conscious instrumentation for the purposes of the Divine in humanity,
Page 517

he can transmute it into a means towards the highest spiritual perfection and
freedom.
\par But the Gita's teaching here has a still profounder significance if we take
it not as a detached quotation self-contained in meaning, as is too often done,
but as we should do, in connection with all that it has been saying throughout
the work and especially in the last twelve chapters. The Gita's philosophy of
life and works is that all proceeds from the Divine Existence, the
transcendent and universal Spirit. All is a veiled manifestation of the
Godhead, Vasudeva, \s{yata\,h} \s{prav\,rttir bh\=ut\=an\=a\.m yena sarvam ida\.m
tatam}, and to unveil the Immortal within and in the world, to dwell in unity
with the Soul of the universe, to rise in consciousness, knowledge, will, love,
spiritual delight to oneness with the supreme Godhead, to live in the highest
spiritual nature with the individual and natural being delivered from
shortcoming and ignorance and made a conscious instrument for the works of
the divine Shakti is the perfection of which humanity is capable and the
condition of immortality and freedom. But how is this possible when in fact
we are enveloped in natural ignorance, the soul shut up in the prison of ego,
overcome, beset, hammered and moulded by the environment, mastered by
the mechanism of Nature, cut off from our hold on the reality of our own
secret spiritual force? The answer is that all this natural action, however now
enveloped in a veiled and contrary working, still contains the principle of its
own evolving freedom and perfection. A Godhead is seated in the heart of
every man and is the Lord of this mysterious action of Nature. And though
this Spirit of the universe, this One who is all, seems to be turning us on the
wheel of the world as if mounted on a machine by the force of Maya,
shaping us in our ignorance as the potter shapes a pot, as the weaver a
fabric, by some skilful mechanical principle, yet is this spirit our own greatest
self and it is according to the real idea, the truth of ourselves, that which is
growing in us and finding always new and more adequate forms in birth after
birth, in our animal and human and divine life, in that which we were, that
which we are, that which we shall be,—it is in accordance with this inner
soul-truth that, as our opened eyes
Page 518

will discover, we are progressively shaped by this spirit within us in its
all-wise omnipotence. This machinery of ego, this tangled complexity of the
three gunas, mind, body, life, emotion, desire, struggle, thought, aspiration,
endeavour, this locked interaction of pain and pleasure, sin and virtue, striving
and success and failure, soul and environment, myself and others, is only the
outward imperfect form taken by a higher spiritual Force in me which
pursues through its vicissitudes the progressive self-expression of the divine
reality and greatness I am secretly in spirit and shall overtly become in
nature. This action contains in itself the principle of its own success, the
principle of the Swabhava and Swadharma.
\par The Jiva is in self-expression a portion of the Purushottama. He
represents in Nature the power of the supreme Spirit, he is in his personality
that Power; he brings out in an individual existence the potentialities of the
Soul of the universe. This Jiva itself is spirit and not the natural ego; the spirit
and not the form of ego is our reality and inner soul principle. The true force
of what we are and can be is there in that higher spiritual Power and this
mechanical Maya of the three gunas is not the inmost and fundamental truth
of its movements; it is only a present executive energy, an apparatus of lower
convenience, a scheme of outward exercise and practice. The spiritual
Nature which has become this multiple personality in the universe, \s{par\=a
prak\,rtir} \s{j\=iva-bh\=ut\=a}, is the basic stuff of our existence: all the rest is lower
derivation and outer formation from a highest hidden activity of the spirit.
And in Nature each of us has a principle and will of our own becoming; each
soul is a force of self-consciousness that formulates an idea of the Divine in it
and guides by that its action and evolution, its progressive self-finding, its
constant varying self-expression, its apparently uncertain but secretly
inevitable growth to fullness. That is our Swabhava, our own real nature; that
is our truth of being which is finding now only a constant partial expression in
our various becoming in the world. The law of action determined by this
Swabhava is our right law of self-shaping, function, working, our Swadharma.
\par This principle obtains throughout cosmos; there is everywhere
Page 519

the one Power at work, one common universal Nature, but in each grade,
form, energy, genus, species, individual creature she follows out a major Idea
and minor ideas and principles of constant and complex variation that found
both the permanent dharma of each and its temporary dharmas. These fix for
it the law of its being in becoming, the curve of its birth and persistence and
change, the force of its self-preservation and self-increasing, the lines of its
stable and evolving self-expression and self-finding, the rules of its relations
to all the rest of the expression of the Self in the universe. To follow the law
of its being, Swadharma, to develop the idea in its being, Swabhava, is its
ground of safety, its right walk and procedure. That does not in the end chain
down the soul to any present formulation, but rather by this way of
development it enriches itself most surely with new experiences assimilated
to its own law and principle and can most powerfully grow and break at its
hour beyond present moulds to a higher self-expression. To be unable to
maintain its own law and principle, to fail to adapt itself to its environment in
such a way as to adapt the environment to itself and make it useful to its own
nature is to lose its self, forfeit its right of self, deviate from its way of self, is
perdition, \s{vina\,s\,ti}, is falsehood, death, anguish of decay and dissolution and
necessity of painful self-recovery often after eclipse and disappearance, is
the vain circuit of the wrong road retarding our real progress. This law
obtains in one form or another in all Nature; it underlies all that action of law
of universality and law of variation revealed to us by science. The same law
obtains in the life of the human being, his many lives in many human bodies.
Here it has an outward play and an inward spiritual truth, and the outward
play can only put on its full and real meaning when we have found the inward
spiritual truth and enlightened all our action with the values of the spirit. This
great and desirable transformation can be effected with rapidity and power in
proportion to our progress in self-knowledge.
\par And first we have to see that the Swabhava means one thing in the
highest spiritual nature and takes quite another form and significance in the
lower nature of the three gunas. There too it
Page 520

acts, but is not in full possession of itself, is seeking as it were for its own true
law in a half light or a darkness and goes on its way through many lower
forms, many false forms, endless imperfections, perversions, self-losings,
self-findings, seekings after norm and rule before it arrives at self-discovery
and perfection. Our nature here is a mixed weft of knowledge and ignorance,
of truth and falsehood, of success and failure, of right and wrong, of finding
and losing, of sin and virtue. It is always the Swabhava that is looking for
self-expression and self-finding through all these things, \s{svabh\=avas tu
pravartate}, a truth which should teach us universal charity and equality of
vision, since we are all subject to the same perplexity and struggle. These
motions belong, not to the soul, but to the nature. The Purushottama is not
limited by this ignorance; he governs it from above and guides the soul
through its changes. The pure immutable self is not touched by these
movements; it witnesses and supports by its intangible eternity this mutable
Nature in her vicissitudes. The real soul of the individual, the central being in
us, is greater than these things, but accepts them in its outward evolution in
Nature. And when we have got at this real soul, at the changeless universal
self sustaining us and at the Purushottama, the Lord within us who presides
over and guides the whole action of Nature, we have found all the spiritual
meaning of the law of our life. For we become aware of the Master of
existence expressing himself for ever in his infinite quality, \s{anantagu\,na}, in
all beings. We become aware of a fourfold presence of the Divinity, a Soul of
self-knowledge and world-knowledge, a Soul of strength and power that
seeks for and finds and uses its powers, a Soul of mutuality and creation and
relation and interchange between creature and creature, a Soul of works that
labours in the universe and serves all in each and turns the labour of each to
the service of all others. We become aware too of the individual Power of
the Divine in us, that which directly uses these fourfold powers, assigns our
strain of self-expression, determines our divine work and office and raises us
through it all to his universality in manifoldness till we can find by it our
spiritual oneness with him and with all that he is in the cosmos.
Page 521

\par The external idea of the four orders of men in life is concerned only with
the more outward working of this truth of the divine action; it is limited to one
side of its operation in the functioning of the three gunas. It is true that in this
birth men fall very largely into one of four types, the man of knowledge, the
man of power, the productive vital man, the man of rude labour and service.
These are not fundamental divisions, but stages of self-development in our
manhood. The human being starts with a sufficient load of ignorance and
inertia; his first state is one of rude toil enforced on his animal indolence by
the needs of the body, by the impulsion of life, by necessity of Nature and,
beyond a certain point of need, by some form of direct or indirect compulsion
which society lays upon him, and those who are still governed by this tamas
are the Shudras, the serfs of society who give it their toil and can contribute
nothing or very little else in comparison with more developed men to its
manifold play of life. By kinetic action man develops the rajasic guna in him
and we get a second type of man who is driven by a constant instinct for
useful creation, production, having, acquisition, holding and enjoying, the
middle economic and vital man, the Vaishya. At a higher elevation of the
rajasic or kinetic quality of our one common nature we get the active man
with a more dominant will, with bolder ambitions, with the instinct to act,
battle, and enforce his will, at the strongest to lead, command, rule, carry
masses of men in his orbit, the fighter, leader, ruler, prince, king, Kshatriya.
And where the sattwic mind predominates, we get the Brahmin, the man with
a turn for knowledge, who brings thought, reflection, the seeking for truth and
an intelligent or at the highest a spiritual rule into life and illumines by it his
conception and mode of existence.
\par There is always in human nature something of all these four personalities
developed or undeveloped, wide or narrow, suppressed or rising to the
surface, but in most men one or the other tends to predominate and seems to
take up sometimes the whole space of action in the nature. And in any
society we should have all four types,—even, for an example, if we create a
purely productive and commercial society such as modern
Page 522

times have attempted, or for that matter a Shudra society of labour, of the
proletariate such as attracts the most modern mind and is now being
attempted in one part of Europe and advocated in others. There would still be
the thinkers moved to find the law and truth and guiding rule of the whole
matter, the captains and leaders of industry who would make all this
productive activity an excuse for the satisfaction of their need of adventure
and battle and leadership and dominance, the many typical purely productive
and wealth-getting men, the average workers satisfied with a modicum of
labour and the reward of their labour. But these are quite outward things, and
if that were all, this economy of human type would have no spiritual
significance. Or it would mean at most, as has been sometimes held in India,
that we have to go through these stages of development in our births; for we
must perforce proceed progressively through the tamasic, the rajaso-tamasic,
the rajasic or rajaso-sattwic to the sattwic nature, ascend and fix ourselves in
an inner Brahminhood, \s{br\=ahma\,nya}, and then seek salvation from that
basis. But in that case there would be no logical room for the Gita's assertion
that even the Shudra or Chandala can by turning his life Godwards climb
straight to spiritual liberty and perfection.
\par The fundamental truth is not this outward thing, but a force of our inner
being in movement, the truth of the fourfold active power of the spiritual
nature. Each Jiva possesses in his spiritual nature these four sides, is a soul of
knowledge, a soul of strength and of power, a soul of mutuality and
interchange, a soul of works and service, but one side or other predominates
in the action and expressive spirit and tinges the dealings of the soul with its
embodied nature; it leads and gives its stamp to the other powers and uses
them for the principal strain of action, tendency, experience. The Swabhava
then follows, not crudely and rigidly as put in the social demarcation, but
subtly and flexibly the law of this strain and develops in developing it the
other three powers. Thus the pursuit of the impulse of works and service
rightly done develops knowledge, increases power, trains closeness or
balance of mutuality and skill and order of relation.
Page 523

Each front of the fourfold godhead moves through the enlargement of its own
dominant principle of nature and enrichment by the other three towards a
total perfection. This development undergoes the law of the three gunas.
There is possible a tamasic and rajasic way of following even the dharma of
the soul of knowledge, a brute tamasic and a high sattwic way of following
the dharma of power, a forceful rajasic or a beautiful and noble sattwic way
of following the dharma of works and service. To arrive at the sattwic way
of the inner individual Swadharma and of the works to which it moves us on
the ways of life is a preliminary condition of perfection. And it may be noted
that the inner Swadharma is not bound to any outward social or other form of
action, occupation or function. The soul of works or that element in us that is
satisfied to serve, can, for example, make the life of the pursuit of knowledge,
the life of struggle and power or the life of mutuality, production and
interchange a means of satisfying its divine impulse to labour and to service.
\par And in the end to arrive at the divinest figure and most dynamic
soul-power of this fourfold activity is a wide doorway to a swiftest and
largest reality of the most high spiritual perfection. This we can do if we turn
the action of the Swadharma into a worship of the inner Godhead, the
universal Spirit, the transcendent Purushottama and, eventually, surrender the
whole action into his hands, \s{mayi sannyasya karm\=a\,ni}. Then as we get
beyond the limitation of the three gunas, so also do we get beyond the division
of the fourfold law and beyond the limitation of all distinctive dharmas,
\s{sarvadharm\=an parityajya}. The Spirit takes up the individual into the
universal Swabhava, perfects and unifies the fourfold soul of nature in us and
does its self-determined works according to the divine will and the
accomplished power of the godhead in the creature.
\par The Gita's injunction is to worship the Divine by our own work,
\s{sva-karma\,n\=a}; our offering must be the works determined by our own law
of being and nature. For from the Divine all movement of creation and
impulse to act originates and by him all this universe is extended and for the
holding together of the worlds he presides over and shapes all action through
the
Page 524

Swabhava. To worship him with our inner and outer activities, to make our
whole life a sacrifice of works to the Highest is to prepare ourselves to
become one with him in all our will and substance and nature. Our work
should be according to the truth within us, it should not be an accommodation
with outward and artificial standards: it must be a living and sincere
expression of the soul and its inborn powers. For to follow out the living
inmost truth of this soul in our present nature will help us eventually to arrive
at the immortal truth of the same soul in the now superconscious supreme
nature. There we can live in oneness with God and our true self and all
beings and, perfected, become a faultless instrument of divine action in the
freedom of the immortal Dharma.
Page 525

\par
\HN XXI
\par
\ht Towards the Supreme Secret
\note{Gita, XVIII. 49-56.}
\par\drop The Teacher has completed all else that he needed to say, he has
worked out all the central principles and the supporting suggestions and
implications of his message and elucidated the principal doubts and questions
that might rise around it, and now all that rests for him to do is to put into
decisive phrase and penetrating formula the one last word, the heart itself of
the message, the very core of his gospel. And we find that this decisive, last
and crowning word is not merely the essence of what has been already said
on the matter, not merely a concentrated description of the needed
self-discipline, the Sadhana, and of that greater spiritual consciousness which
is to be the result of all its effort and askesis; it sweeps out, as it were, yet
farther, breaks down every limit and rule, canon and formula and opens into a
wide and illimitable spiritual truth with an infinite potentiality of significance.
And that is a sign of the profundity, the wide reach, the greatness of spirit of
the Gita's teaching. An ordinary religious teaching or philosophical doctrine is
well enough satisfied to seize on certain great and vital aspects of truth and
turn them into utilisable dogma and instruction, method and practice for the
guidance of man in his inner life and the law and form of his action; it does
not go farther, it does not open doors out of the circle of its own system, does
not lead us out into some widest freedom and unimprisoned largeness. This
limitation is useful and indeed for a time indispensable. Man bounded by his
mind and will has need of a law and rule, a fixed system, a definite practice
selective of his thought and action; he asks for the single unmistakable hewn
path hedged, fixed and secure to the tread, for the limited horizons, for the
enclosed resting-places. It is only the strong
Page 526

and few who can move through freedom to freedom. And yet in the end the
free soul ought to have an issue out of the forms and systems in which the
mind finds its account and takes its limited pleasure. To exceed our ladder of
ascent, not to stop short even on the topmost stair but move untrammelled
and at large in the wideness of the spirit is a release important for our
perfection; the spirit's absolute liberty is our perfect status. And this is how
the Gita leads us: it lays down a firm and sure but very large way of ascent, a
great Dharma, and then it takes us out beyond all that is laid down, beyond all
dharmas, into infinitely open spaces, divulges to us the hope, lets us into the
secret of an absolute perfection founded in an absolute spiritual liberty, and
that secret, \s{guhyatamam}, is the substance of what it calls its supreme
word, that the hidden thing, the inmost knowledge.
\par And first the Gita restates the body of its message. It summarises the
whole outline and essence in the short space of fifteen verses, lines of a brief
and concentrated expression and significance that miss nothing of the kernel
of the matter, couched in phrases of the most lucid precision and clearness.
And they must therefore be scanned with care, must be read deeply in the
light of all that has gone before, because here it is evidently intended to
extract what the Gita itself considers to be the central sense of its own
teaching. The statement sets out from the original starting-point of the
thought in the book, the enigma of human action, the apparently insuperable
difficulty of living in the highest self and spirit while yet we continue to do the
works of the world. The easiest way is to give up the problem as insoluble,
life and action as an illusion or an inferior movement of existence to be
abandoned as soon as we can rise out of the snare of the world into the truth
of spiritual being. That is the ascetic solution, if it can be called a solution; at
any rate it is a decisive and effective way out of the enigma, a way to which
ancient Indian thought of the highest and most meditative kind, as soon as it
commenced to turn at a sharp incline from its first large and free synthesis,
had moved with an always increasing preponderance. The Gita like the
Tantra and on certain sides the later religions attempts to preserve the
ancient balance: it
Page 527

maintains the substance and foundation of the original synthesis, but the form
has been changed and renovated in the light of a developing spiritual
experience. This teaching does not evade the difficult problem of reconciling
the full active life of man with the inner life in the highest self and spirit; it
advances what it holds to be the real solution. It does not at all deny the
efficacy of the ascetic renunciation of life for its own purpose, but it sees that
that cuts instead of loosening the knot of the riddle and therefore it accounts
it an inferior method and holds its own for the better way. The two paths both
lead us out of the lower ignorant normal nature of man to the pure spiritual
consciousness and so far both must be held to be valid and even one in
essence: but where one stops short and turns back, the other advances with a
firm subtlety and high courage, opens a gate on unexplored vistas, completes
man in God and unites and reconciles in the spirit soul and Nature.
\par And therefore in the first five of these verses the Gita so phrases its
statement that it shall be applicable to both the way of the inner and the way
of the outer renunciation and yet in such a manner that one has only to assign
to some of their common expressions a deeper and more inward meaning in
order to get the sense and thought of the method favoured by the Gita. The
difficulty of human action is that the soul and nature of man seem fatally
subjected to many kinds of bondage, the prison of the ignorance, the meshes
of the ego, the chain of the passions, the hammering insistence of the life of
the moment, an obscure and limited circle without an issue. The soul shut up
in this circle of action has no freedom, no leisure or light of self-knowledge to
make the discovery of its self and the true value of life and meaning of
existence. It has indeed such hints of its being as it can get from its active
personality and dynamic nature, but the standards of perfection it can erect
there are much too temporal, restricted and relative to be a satisfactory key
to its own riddle. How, while absorbed and continually forced outward by the
engrossing call of its active nature, is it to get back to its real self and spiritual
existence? The ascetic renunciation and the way of the Gita are both agreed
that it must first of all renounce this
Page 528

absorption, must cast from it the external solicitation of outward things and
separate silent self from active nature; it must identify itself with the immobile
Spirit and live in the silence. It must arrive at an inner inactivity,
\s{nai\,skarmya}. It is therefore this saving inner passivity that the Gita puts
here as the first object of its Yoga, the first necessary perfection in it or
Siddhi. “An understanding without attachment in all things, a soul
self-conquered and empty of desire, man attains by renunciation a supreme
perfection of \s{nai\,skarmya}.”
\par This ideal of renunciation, of a self-conquered stillness, spiritual passivity
and freedom from desire is common to all the ancient wisdom. The Gita gives
us its psychological foundation with an unsurpassed completeness and
clearness. It rests on the common experience of all seekers of
self-knowledge that there are two different natures and as it were two selves
in us. There is the lower self of the obscure mental, vital and physical nature
subject to ignorance and inertia in the very stuff of its consciousness and
especially in its basis of material substance, kinetic and vital indeed by the
power of life but without inherent self-possession and self-knowledge in its
action, attaining in the mind to some knowledge and harmony, but only with
difficult effort and by a constant struggle with its own disabilities. And there
is the higher nature and self of our spiritual being, self-possessed and
self-luminous but in our ordinary mentality inaccessible to our experience. At
times we get glimpses of this greater thing within us, but we are not
consciously within it, we do not live in its light and calm and illimitable
splendour. The first of these two very different things is the Gita's nature of
the three gunas. Its seeing of itself is centred in the ego idea, its principle of
action is desire born of ego, and the knot of ego is attachment to the objects
of the mind and sense and the life's desire. The inevitable constant result of
all these things is bondage, settled subjection to a lower control, absence of
self-mastery, absence of self-knowledge. The other greater power and
presence is discovered to be nature and being of the pure spirit unconditioned
by ego, that which is called in Indian philosophy self and impersonal
Brahman. Its principle is an infinite and an impersonal existence
Page 529

one and the same in all: and, since this impersonal existence is without ego,
without conditioning quality, without desire, need or stimulus, it is immobile
and immutable; eternally the same, it regards and supports but does not share
or initiate the action of the universe. The soul when it throws itself out into
active Nature is the Gita's Kshara, its mobile or mutable Purusha; the same
soul gathered back into pure silent self and essential spirit is the Gita's
Akshara, immobile or immutable Purusha.
\par Then evidently the straight and simplest way to get out of the close
bondage of the active nature and back to spiritual freedom is to cast away
entirely all that belongs to the dynamics of the ignorance and to convert the
soul into a pure spiritual existence. That is what is called becoming Brahman,
\s{brahma-bh\=uya}. It is to put off the lower mental, vital, physical existence
and to put on the pure spiritual being. This can best be done by the
intelligence and will, \s{buddhi}, our present topmost principle. It has to turn
away from the things of the lower existence and first and foremost from its
effective knot of desire, from our attachment to the objects pursued by the
mind and the senses. One must become an understanding unattached in all
things, \s{asakta-buddhi\,h sarvatra}. Then all desire passes away from the
soul in its silence; it is free from all longings, \s{vigata-sp\,rha\,h}. That brings
with it or it makes possible the subjection of our lower and the possession of
our higher self, a possession dependent on complete self-mastery, secured by
a radical victory and conquest over our mobile nature, \s{jit\=atm\=a}. And all
this amounts to an absolute inner renunciation of the desire of things,
\s{sanny\=asa}. Renunciation is the way to this perfection and the man who
has thus inwardly renounced all is described by the Gita as the true
Sannyasin. But because the word usually signifies as well an outward
renunciation or sometimes even that alone, the Teacher uses another word,
\s{ty\=aga}, to distinguish the inward from the outward withdrawal and says
that Tyaga is better than Sannyasa. The ascetic way goes much farther in its
recoil from the dynamic Nature. It is enamoured of renunciation for its own
sake and insists on an outward giving up of life and action, a complete
quietism of soul and nature. That, the Gita replies, is
Page 530

not possible entirely so long as we live in the body. As far as it is possible, it
may be done, but such a rigorous diminution of works is not indispensable: it
is not even really or at least ordinarily advisable. The one thing needed is a
complete inner quietism and that is all the Gita's sense of \s{nai\,skarmya}.
\par If we ask why this reservation, why this indulgence to the dynamic
principle when our object is to become the pure self and the pure self is
described as inactive, \s{akart\=a}, the answer is that that inactivity and
divorce of self from Nature are not the whole truth of our spiritual release.
Self and Nature are in the end one thing; a total and perfect spirituality makes
us one with all the Divine in self and in nature. In fact this becoming
Brahman, this assumption into the self of eternal silence, \s{brahma-bh\=uya},
is not all our objective, but only the necessary immense base for a still greater
and more marvellous divine becoming, \s{mad-bh\=ava}. And to get to that
greatest spiritual perfection we have indeed to be immobile in the self, silent
in all our members, but also to act in the power, Shakti, Prakriti, the true and
high force of the Spirit. And if we ask how a simultaneity of what seem to be
two opposites is possible, the answer is that that is the very nature of a
complete spiritual being; always it has this double poise of the Infinite. The
impersonal self is silent; we too must be inwardly silent, impersonal,
withdrawn into the spirit. The impersonal self looks on all action as done not
by it but by Prakriti; it regards with a pure equality all the working of her
qualities, modes and forces: the soul impersonalised in the self must similarly
regard all our actions as done not by itself but by the qualities of Prakriti; it
must be equal in all things, \s{sarvatra}. And at the same time in order that
we may not stop here, in order that we may eventually go forward and find a
spiritual rule and direction in our works and not only a law of inner immobility
and silence, we are asked to impose on the intelligence and will the attitude of
sacrifice, all our action inwardly changed and turned into an offering to the
Lord of Nature, to the Being of whom she is the self-power, \s{sv\=a prak\,rti\,h},
the supreme Spirit. Even we have eventually to renounce all into his hands, to
abandon all personal initiation of action, \s{sarv\=arambh\=a\,h}, to
Page 531

keep our natural selves only as an instrument of his works and his purpose.
These things have been already explained fully and the Gita does not here
insist, but uses simply without farther qualification the common terms,
\s{sanny\=asa} and \s{nai\,skarmya}.
\par A completest inner quietism once admitted as our necessary means
towards living in the pure impersonal self, the question how practically it
brings about that result is the next issue that arises. “How, having attained
this perfection, one thus attains to the Brahman, hear from me, O son of
Kunti,—that which is the supreme concentrated direction of the knowledge.”
The knowledge meant here is the Yoga of the Sankhyas,—the Yoga of pure
knowledge accepted by the Gita, \s{j\~n\=ana-yogena} \s{s\=a\.nkhy\=an\=am}, so far
as it is one with its own Yoga which includes also the way of works of the
Yogins, \s{karma-yogena} \s{yogin\=am}. But all mention of works is kept
back for the moment. For by Brahman here is meant at first the silent, the
impersonal, the immutable. The Brahman indeed is both for the Upanishads
and the Gita all that is and lives and moves; it is not solely an impersonal
Infinite or an unthinkable and incommunicable Absolute, \s{acintyam
avyavah\=aryam}. All this is Brahman, says the Upanishad; all this is
Vasudeva, says the Gita,—the supreme Brahman is all that moves or is
stable and his hands and feet and eyes and heads and faces are on every side
of us. But still there are two aspects of this All,—his immutable eternal self
that supports existence and his self of active power that moves abroad in the
world movement. It is only when we lose our limited ego personality in the
impersonality of the self that we arrive at the calm and free oneness by
which we can possess a true unity with the universal power of the Divine in
his world movement. Impersonality is a denial of limitation and division, and
the cult of impersonality is a natural condition of true being, an indispensable
preliminary of true knowledge and therefore a first requisite of true action. It
is very clear that we cannot become one self with all or one with the
universal Spirit and his vast self-knowledge, his complex will and his
widespread world-purpose by insisting on our limited personality of ego; for
that divides us from others and it makes us bound and self-centred in our
view and in our will to action.
Page 532

Imprisoned in personality we can only get at a limited union by sympathy or
by some relative accommodation of ourselves to the view-point and feeling
and will of others. To be one with all and with the Divine and his will in the
cosmos we must become at first impersonal and free from our ego and its
claims and from the ego's way of seeing ourselves and the world and others.
And we cannot do this if there is not something in our being other than the
personality, other than the ego, an impersonal self one with all existences. To
lose ego and be this impersonal self, to become this impersonal Brahman in
our consciousness is therefore the first movement of this Yoga.
\par How then is this to be done? First, says the Gita, through a union of our
purified intelligence with the pure spiritual substance in us by the yoga of the
buddhi, \s{buddhy\=a vi\'suddhay\=a yukta\,h}. This spiritual turning of the buddhi
from the outward and downward to the inward and upward look is the
essence of the Yoga of knowledge. The purified understanding has to control
the whole being, \s{\=atm\=ana\.m niyamya}; it must draw us away from
attachment to the outward-going desires of the lower nature by a firm and a
steady will, \s{dh\,rty\=a}, which in its concentration faces entirely towards the
impersonality of the pure spirit. The senses must abandon their objects, the
mind must cast away the liking and disliking which these objects excite in
it,—for the impersonal self has no desires and repulsions; these are vital
reactions of our personality to the touches of things and the corresponding
response of the mind and senses to the touches is their support and their
basis. An entire control has to be acquired over the mind, speech and body,
over even the vital and physical reactions, hunger and cold and heat and
physical pleasure and pain; the whole of our being must become indifferent,
unaffected by these things, equal to all outward touches and to their inward
reactions and responses. This is the most direct and powerful method, the
straight and sharp way of Yoga. There has to be a complete cessation of
desire and attachment, \s{vair\=agya}; a strong resort to impersonal solitude, a
constant union with the inmost self by meditation is demanded of the seeker.
And yet the object of this austere discipline is not to be self-centred in some
supreme
Page 533

egoistic seclusion and tranquillity of the sage and thinker averse to the trouble
of participation in the world-action; the object is to get rid of all ego. One
must put away utterly first the rajasic kind of egoism, egoistic strength and
violence, arrogance, desire, wrath, the sense and instinct of possession, the
urge of the passions, the strong lusts of life. But afterwards must be
discarded egoism of all kinds, even of the most sattwic type; for the aim is to
make soul and mind and life free in the end from all imprisoning I-ness and
my-ness, \s{nirmama}. The extinction of ego and its demands of all sorts is
the method put before us. For the pure impersonal self which, unshaken,
supports the universe has no egoism and makes no demand on thing or
person; it is calm and luminously impassive and silently regards all things and
persons with an equal and impartial eye of self-knowledge and
world-knowledge. Then clearly it is by living inwardly in a similar or identical
impersonality that the soul within, released from the siege of things, can best
become capable of oneness with this immutable Brahman which regards and
knows but is not affected by the forms and mutations of the universe.
\par This first pursuit of impersonality as enjoined by the Gita brings with it
evidently a certain completest inner quietism and is identical in its inmost
parts and principles of practice with the method of Sannyasa. And yet there
is a point at which its tendency of withdrawal from the claims of dynamic
Nature and the external world is checked and a limit imposed to prevent the
inner quietism from deepening into refusal of action and a physical
withdrawal. The renunciation of their objects by the senses, \s{vi\,say\=a\.ms
tyaktv\=a}, is to be of the nature of Tyaga; it must be a giving up of all
sensuous attachment, \s{rasa}, not a refusal of the intrinsic necessary activity
of the senses. One must move among surrounding things and act on the
objects of the sense-field with a pure, true and intense, a simple and absolute
operation of the senses for their utility to the spirit in divine action, \s{kevalair
indriyai\'s caran}, and not at all for the fulfilment of desire. There is to be
\s{vair\=agya}, not in the common significance of disgust of life or distaste for
the world action, but renunciation of \s{r\=aga}, as also of its opposite,
\s{dve\,sa}. There must be a withdrawal from
Page 534

all mental and vital liking as from all mental and vital disliking whatsoever.
And this is asked not for extinction, but in order that there may be a perfect
enabling equality in which the spirit can give an unhampered and unlimited
assent to the integral and comprehensive divine vision of things and to the
integral divine action in Nature. A continual resort to meditation,
\s{dhy\=ana-yoga-paro nityam}, is the firm means by which the soul of man
can realise its self of Power and its self of silence. And yet there must be no
abandonment of the active life for a life of pure meditation; action must
always be done as a sacrifice to the supreme Spirit. This movement of recoil
in the path of Sannyasa prepares an absorbed disappearance of the individual
in the Eternal, and renunciation of action and life in the world is an
indispensable step in the process. But in the Gita's path of Tyaga it is a
preparation rather for the turning of our whole life and existence and of all
action into an integral oneness with the serene and immeasurable being,
consciousness and will of the Divine, and it preludes and makes possible a
vast and total passing upward of the soul out of the lower ego to the
inexpressible perfection of the supreme spiritual nature, \s{par\=a} \s{prak\,rti}.
\par This decisive departure of the Gita's thought is indicated in the next two
verses, of which the first runs with a significant sequence, “When one has
become the Brahman, when one neither grieves nor desires, when one is
equal to all beings, then one gets the supreme love and devotion to Me.” But
in the narrow path of knowledge bhakti, devotion to the personal Godhead,
can be only an inferior and preliminary movement; the end, the climax is the
disappearance of personality in a featureless oneness with the impersonal
Brahman in which there can be no place for bhakti: for there is none to be
adored and none to adore; all else is lost in the silent immobile identity of the
Jiva with the Atman. Here there is given to us something yet higher than the
Impersonal,—here there is the supreme Self who is the supreme Ishwara,
here there is the supreme Soul and its supreme nature, here there is the
Purushottama who is beyond the personal and impersonal and reconciles
them on his eternal heights. The ego personality still disappears in the silence
of the Impersonal, but
Page 535

at the same time there remains even with this silence at the back the action
of a supreme Self, one greater than the Impersonal. There is no longer the
lower blind and limping action of the ego and the three gunas, but instead the
vast self-determining movement of an infinite spiritual Force, a free
immeasurable Shakti. All Nature becomes the power of the one Divine and
all action his action through the individual as channel and instrument. In place
of the ego there comes forward conscious and manifest the true spiritual
individual in the freedom of his real nature, in the power of his supernal
status, in the majesty and splendour of his eternal kinship to the Divine, an
imperishable portion of the supreme Godhead, an indestructible power of the
supreme Prakriti, \s{mamaiv\=a\.m\'sa\,h san\=atana\,h}, \s{par\=a prak\,rtir}
\s{j\=iva-bh\=ut\=a}. The soul of man then feels itself to be one in a supreme
spiritual impersonality with the Purushottama and in its universalised
personality a manifest power of the Godhead. Its knowledge is a light of his
knowledge; its will is a force of his will; its unity with all in the universe is a
play of his eternal oneness. It is in this double realisation, it is in this union of
two sides of an ineffable Truth of existence by either and both of which man
can approach and enter into his own infinite being, that the liberated man has
to live and act and feel and determine or rather have determined for him by a
greatest power of his supreme self his relations with all and the inner and
outer workings of his spirit. And in that unifying realisation adoration, love
and devotion are not only still possible, but are a large, an inevitable and a
crowning portion of the highest experience. The One who eternally becomes
the Many, the Many who in their apparent division are still eternally one, the
Highest who displays in us this secret and mystery of existence, not dispersed
by his multiplicity, not limited by his oneness,—this is the integral knowledge,
this is the reconciling experience which makes one capable of liberated
action, \s{muktasya karma}.
\par This knowledge comes, says the Gita, by a highest bhakti. It is attained
when the mind exceeds itself by a supramental and high spiritual seeing of
things and when the heart too rises in unison beyond our more ignorant
mental forms of love and
Page 536

devotion to a love that is calm and deep and luminous with widest knowledge,
to a supreme delight in God and an illimitable adoration, the unperturbed
ecstasy, the spiritual Ananda. When the soul has lost its separative
personality, when it has become the Brahman, it is then that it can live in the
true Person and can attain to the supreme revealing bhakti for the
Purushottama and can come to know him utterly by the power of its profound
bhakti, its heart's knowledge, \s{bhakty\=a m\=am abhij\=an\=ati}. That is the integral
knowledge, when the heart's fathomless vision completes the mind's absolute
experience,—\s{samagra\.m m\=a\.m j\~n\=atv\=a}. “He comes to know Me,” says the
Gita, “who and how much I am and in all the reality and principles of my
being, \s{y\=av\=an} \s{ya\'s c\=asmi} \s{tattvata\,h}.” This integral knowledge is the
knowledge of the Divine present in the individual; it is the entire experience
of the Lord secret in the heart of man, revealed now as the supreme Self of
his existence, the Sun of all his illumined consciousness, the Master and
Power of all his works, the divine Fountain of all his soul's love and delight,
the Lover and Beloved of his worship and adoration. It is the knowledge too
of the Divine extended in the universe, of the Eternal from whom all
proceeds and in whom all lives and has its being, of the Self and Spirit of the
cosmos, of Vasudeva who has become all this that is, of the Lord of cosmic
existence who reigns over the works of Nature. It is the knowledge of the
divine Purusha luminous in his transcendent eternity, the form of whose being
escapes from the thought of the mind but not from its silence; it is the entire
living experience of him as absolute Self, supreme Brahman, supreme Soul,
supreme Godhead: for that seemingly incommunicable Absolute is at the
same time and even in that highest status the originating Spirit of the cosmic
action and Lord of all these existences. The soul of the liberated man thus
enters by a reconciling knowledge, penetrates by a perfect simultaneous
delight of the transcendent Divine, of the Divine in the individual and of the
Divine in the universe into the Purushottama, \s{m\=a\.m vi\'sate tadanantaram}.
He becomes one with him in his self-knowledge and self-experience, one
with him in his being and consciousness and will and world-knowledge and
world-impulse, one with him in the universe and
Page 537

in his unity with all creatures in the universe and one with him beyond world
and individual in the transcendence of the eternal Infinite, \s{\'s\=a\'svata\.m padam
avyayam}. This is the culmination of the supreme bhakti that is at the core of
the supreme knowledge.
\par And it then becomes evident how action continual and unceasing and of
all kinds without diminution or abandonment of any part of the activities of life
can be not only quite consistent with a supreme spiritual experience, but as
forceful a means of reaching this highest spiritual condition as bhakti or
knowledge. Nothing can be more positive than the Gita's statement in this
matter. “And by doing also all actions always lodged in Me he attains by my
grace the eternal and imperishable status.” This liberating action is of the
character of works done in a profound union of the will and all the dynamic
parts of our nature with the Divine in ourself and the cosmos. It is done first
as a sacrifice with the idea still of our self as the doer. It is done next without
that idea and with a perception of the Prakriti as the sole doer. It is done last
with the knowledge of that Prakriti as the supreme power of the Divine and a
renunciation, a surrender of all our actions to him with the individual as a
channel only and an instrument. Our works then proceed straight from the
Self and Divine within us, are a part of the indivisible universal action, are
initiated and performed not by us but by a vast transcendent Shakti. All that
we do is done for the sake of the Lord seated in the heart of all, for the
Godhead in the individual and for the fulfilment of his will in us, for the sake
of the Divine in the world, for the good of all beings, for the fulfilment of the
world action and the world purpose, or in one word for the sake of the
Purushottama and done really by him through his universal Shakti. These
divine works, whatever their form or outward character, cannot bind, but are
rather a potent means for rising out of this lower Prakriti of the three gunas
to the perfection of the supreme, divine and spiritual nature. Disengaged from
these mixed and limited dharmas we escape into the immortal Dharma which
comes upon us when we make ourselves one in all our consciousness and
action with the Purushottama. That oneness here brings with it the power to
rise there into the immortality
Page 538

beyond Time. There we shall exist in his eternal transcendence.
\par Thus these eight verses carefully read in the light of the knowledge
already given by the Teacher are a brief, but still a comprehensive indication
of the whole essential idea, the entire central method, all the kernel of the
complete Yoga of the Gita.
Page 539

\par
\HN XXII
\par
\ht The Supreme Secret
\note{Gita, XVIII. 57-66, 73.}
\par\drop The essence of the teaching and the Yoga has thus been given to
the disciple on the field of his work and battle and the divine Teacher now
proceeds to apply it to his action, but in a way that makes it applicable to all
action. Attached to a crucial example, spoken to the protagonist of
Kurukshetra, the words bear a much wider significance and are a universal
rule for all who are ready to ascend above the ordinary mentality and to live
and act in the highest spiritual consciousness. To break out of ego and
personal mind and see everything in the wideness of the self and spirit, to
know God and adore him in his integral truth and in all his aspects, to
surrender all oneself to the transcendent Soul of nature and existence, to
possess and be possessed by the divine consciousness, to be one with the
One in universality of love and delight and will and knowledge, one in him
with all beings, to do works as an adoration and a sacrifice on the divine
foundation of a world in which all is God and in the divine status of a liberated
spirit, is the sense of the Gita's Yoga. It is a transition from the apparent to
the supreme spiritual and real truth of our being, and one enters into it by
putting off the many limitations of the separative consciousness and the
mind's attachment to the passion and unrest and ignorance, the lesser light
and knowledge, the sin and virtue, the dual law and standard of the lower
nature. Therefore, says the Teacher, “devoting all thyself to me, giving up in
thy conscious mind all thy actions into Me, resorting to Yoga of the will and
intelligence be always one in heart and consciousness with Me. If thou art
that at all times, then by my grace thou shalt pass safe through all difficult
and perilous passages; but if from egoism thou hear not, thou shalt fall into
perdition. Vain is this thy resolve, that
Page 540

in thy egoism thou thinkest, saying `I will not fight'; thy nature shall appoint
thee to thy work. What from delusion thou desirest not to do, that helplessly
thou shalt do bound by thy own work born of thy swabhava. The Lord is
stationed in the heart of all existences, O Arjuna, and turns them all round
and round mounted on a machine by his Maya. In him take refuge in every
way of thy being and by his grace thou shalt come to the supreme peace and
the eternal status.”
\par These are lines that carry in them the innermost heart of this Yoga and
lead to its crowning experience and we must understand them in their
innermost spirit and the whole vastness of that high summit of experience.
The words express the most complete, intimate and living relation possible
between God and man; they are instinct with the concentrated force of
religious feeling that springs from the human being's absolute adoration, his
upward surrender of his whole existence, his unreserved and perfect
self-giving to the transcendent and universal Divinity from whom he comes
and in whom he lives. This stress of feeling is in entire consonance with the
high and enduring place that the Gita assigns to bhakti, to the love of God, to
the adoration of the Highest, as the inmost spirit and motive of the supreme
action and the crown and core of the supreme knowledge. The phrases used
and the spiritual emotion with which they vibrate seem to give the most
intense prominence possible and an utmost importance to the personal truth
and presence of the Godhead. It is no abstract Absolute of the philosopher,
no indifferent impersonal Presence or ineffable Silence intolerant of all
relations to whom this complete surrender of all our works can be made and
this closeness and intimacy of oneness with him in all the parts of our
conscious existence imposed as the condition and law of our perfection or of
whom this divine intervention and protection and deliverance are the promise.
It is a Master of our works, a Friend and Lover of our soul, an intimate Spirit
of our life, an indwelling and overdwelling Lord of all our personal and
impersonal self and nature who alone can utter to us this near and moving
message. And yet this is not the common relation established by the religions
between man living in his sattwic or
Page 541

other ego-mind and some personal form and aspect of the Deity,
\s{i\,s\,ta-deva}, constructed by that mind or offered to it to satisfy its limited
ideal, aspiration or desire. That is the ordinary sense and actual character of
the normal mental being's religious devotion; but here there is something
wider that passes beyond the mind and its limits and its dharmas. It is
something deeper than the mind that offers and something greater than the
Ishta-deva that receives the surrender.
\par That which surrenders here is the Jiva, the essential soul, the original
central and spiritual being of man, the individual Purusha. It is the Jiva
delivered from the limiting and ignorant ego-sense who knows himself not as
a separate personality but as an eternal portion and power and soul-becoming
of the Divine, \s{a\.m\'sa san\=atana}, the Jiva released and uplifted by the
passing away of ignorance and established in the light and freedom of his
own true and supreme nature which is one with that of the Eternal. It is this
central spiritual being in us who thus enters into a perfect and closely real
relation of delight and union with the origin and continent and governing Self
and Power of our existence. And he who receives our surrender is no limited
Deity but the Purushottama, the one eternal Godhead, the one supreme Soul
of all that is and of all Nature, the original transcendent Spirit of existence.
An immutable impersonal self-existence is his first obvious spiritual
self-presentation to the experience of our liberated knowledge, the first sign
of his presence, the first touch and impression of his substance. A universal
and transcendent infinite Person or Purusha is the mysterious hidden secret
of his very being, unthinkable in form of mind, \s{acintya-r\=upa}, but very near
and present to the powers of our consciousness, emotion, will and knowledge
when they are lifted out of themselves, out of their blind and petty forms into
a luminous spiritual, an immeasurable supramental Ananda and power and
gnosis. It is He, ineffable Absolute but also Friend and Lord and Enlightener
and Lover, who is the object of this most complete devotion and approach
and this most intimate inner becoming and surrender. This union, this relation
is a thing lifted beyond the forms and laws of the limiting mind, too high for all
these inferior dharmas;
Page 542

it is a truth of our self and spirit. And yet or rather therefore, because it is the
truth of our self and spirit, the truth of its oneness with that Spirit from which
all comes and by it and as its derivations and suggestions all exists and
travails, it is not a negation but a fulfilment of all that mind and life point to
and bear in them as their secret and unaccomplished significance. Thus it is
not by a nirvana, an exclusion and negating extinction of all that we are here,
but by a nirvana, an exclusion and negating extinction of ignorance and ego
and a consequent ineffable fulfilment of our knowledge and will and heart's
aspiration, an uplifted and limitless living of them in the Divine, in the Eternal,
\s{nivasi\,syasi mayyeva}, a transfigurement and transference of all our
consciousness to a greater inner status that there comes this supreme
perfection and release in the spirit.
\par The crux of the spiritual problem, the character of this transition of
which it is so difficult for the normal mind of man to get a true apprehension,
turns altogether upon the capital distinction between the ignorant life of the
ego in the lower nature and the large and luminous existence of the liberated
Jiva in his own true spiritual nature. The renunciation of the first must be
complete, the transition to the second absolute. This is the distinction on
which the Gita dwells here with all possible emphasis. On the one side is this
poor, trepidant, braggart egoistic condition of consciousness, \s{aha\.nk\,rta
bh\=ava}, the crippling narrowness of this little helpless separative personality
according to whose view-point we ordinarily think and act, feel and respond
to the touches of existence. On the other are the vast spiritual reaches of
immortal fullness, bliss and knowledge into which we are admitted through
union with the divine Being, of whom we are then a manifestation and
expression in the eternal light and no longer a disguise in the darkness of the
ego-nature. It is the completeness of this union which is indicated by the
Gita's \s{satata\.m mac-citta\,h}. The life of the ego is founded on a
construction of the apparent mental, vital and physical truth of existence, on a
nexus of pragmatic relations between the individual soul and Nature, on an
intellectual, emotional and sensational interpretation of things used by the little
limited I in
Page 543

us to maintain and satisfy the ideas and desires of its bounded separate
personality amid the vast action of the universe. All our dharmas, all the
ordinary standards by which we determine our view of things and our
knowledge and our action, proceed upon this narrow and limiting basis, and to
follow them even in the widest wheelings round our ego centre does not
carry us out of this petty circle. It is a circle in which the soul is a contented
or struggling prisoner, for ever subject to the mixed compulsions of Nature.
\par For Purusha veils himself in this round, veils his divine and immortal
being in ignorance and is subject to the law of an insistent limiting Prakriti.
That law is the compelling rule of the three gunas. It is a triple stair that
stumbles upward towards the divine light but cannot reach it. At its base is
the law or dharma of inertia: the tamasic man inertly obeys in a customary
mechanical action the suggestions and impulses, the round of will of his
material and his half-intellectualised vital and sensational nature. In the middle
intervenes the kinetic law or dharma; the rajasic man, vital, dynamic, active,
attempts to impose himself on his world and environment, but only increases
the wounding weight and tyrant yoke of his turbulent passions, desires and
egoisms, the burden of his restless self-will, the yoke of his rajasic nature. At
the top presses down upon life the harmonic regulative law or dharma; the
sattwic man attempts to erect and follow his limited personal standards of
reasoning knowledge, enlightened utility or mechanised virtue, his religions
and philosophies and ethical formulas, mental systems and constructions,
fixed channels of idea and conduct which do not agree with the totality of the
meaning of life and are constantly being broken in the movement of the wider
universal purpose. The dharma of the sattwic man is the highest in the circle
of the gunas; but that too is a limited view and a dwarfed standard. Its
imperfect indications lead to a petty and relative perfection; temporarily
satisfying to the enlightened personal ego, it is not founded either on the
whole truth of the self or on the whole truth of Nature.
\par And in fact the actual life of man is not at any time one
Page 544

of these things alone, neither a mechanical routine execution of the first crude
law of Nature, nor the struggle of a kinetic soul of action, nor a victorious
emergence of conscious light and reason and good and knowledge. There is a
mixture of all these dharmas out of which our will and intelligence make a
more or less arbitrary construction to be realised as best it can, but never in
fact realised except by compromise with other compelling things in the
universal Prakriti. The sattwic ideals of our enlightened will and reason are
either themselves compromises, at best progressive compromises, subject to
a constant imperfection and flux of change, or if absolute in their character,
they can be followed only as a counsel of perfection ignored for the most part
in practice or successful only as a partial influence. And if sometimes we
imagine we have completely realised them, it is because we ignore in
ourselves the subconscious or half-conscious mixture of other powers and
motives that are usually as much or more than our ideals the real force in our
action. That self-ignorance constitutes the whole vanity of human reason and
self-righteousness; it is the dark secret lining behind the spotless white
outsides of human sainthood and alone makes possible the specious egoisms
of knowledge and virtue. The best human knowledge is a half knowledge and
the highest human virtue a thing of mixed quality and, even when most
sincerely absolute in standard, sufficiently relative in practice. As a general
law of living the absolute sattwic ideals cannot prevail in conduct;
indispensable as a power for the betterment and raising of personal aspiration
and conduct, their insistence modifies life but cannot wholly change it, and
their perfect fulfilment images itself only in a dream of the future or a world
of heavenly nature free from the mixed strain of our terrestrial existence. It
cannot be otherwise because neither the nature of this world nor the nature
of man is or can be one single piece made of the pure stuff of sattwa.
\par The first door of escape we see out of this limitation of our possibilities,
out of this confused mixture of dharmas is in a certain high trend towards
impersonality, a movement inwards towards something large and universal
and calm and free and
Page 545

right and pure hidden now by the limiting mind of ego. The difficulty is that
while we can feel a positive release into this impersonality in moments of the
quiet and silence of our being, an impersonal activity is by no means so easy
to realise. The pursuit of an impersonal truth or an impersonal will in our
conduct is vitiated so long as we live at all in our normal mind by that which is
natural and inevitable to that mind, the law of our personality, the subtle urge
of our vital nature, the colour of ego. The pursuit of impersonal truth is turned
by these influences into an unsuspected cloak for a system of intellectual
preferences supported by our mind's limiting insistence; the pursuit of a
disinterested impersonal action is converted into a greater authority and
apparent high sanction for our personal will's interested selections and blind
arbitrary persistences. On the other hand an absolute impersonality would
seem to impose an equally absolute quietism, and this would mean that all
action is bound to the machinery of the ego and the three gunas and to
recede from life and its works the only way out of the circle. This impersonal
silence however is not the last word of wisdom in the matter, because it is not
the only way and crown or not all the way and the last crown of
self-realisation open to our endeavour. There is a mightier fuller more positive
spiritual experience in which the circle of our egoistic personality and the
round of the mind's limitations vanish in the unwalled infinity of a greatest self
and spirit and yet life and its works not only remain still acceptable and
possible but reach up and out to their widest spiritual completeness and
assume a grand ascending significance.
\par There have been different gradations in this movement to bridge the gulf
between an absolute impersonality and the dynamic possibilities of our nature.
The thought and practice of the Mahayana approached this difficult
reconciliation through the experience of a deep desirelessness and a large
dissolving freedom from mental and vital attachment and sanskaras and on
the positive side a universal altruism, a fathomless compassion for the world
and its creatures which became as it were the flood and outpouring of the
high Nirvanic state on life and action.
Page 546

That reconciliation was equally the sense of yet another spiritual experience,
more conscious of a world significance, more profound, kindling, richly
comprehensive on the side of action, a step nearer to the thought of the Gita:
this experience we find or can at least read behind the utterances of the
Taoist thinkers. There there seems to be an impersonal ineffable Eternal who
is spirit and at the same time the one life of the universe: it supports and
flows impartially in all things, \s{sama\.m brahma}; it is a One that is nothing,
Asat, because other than all that we perceive and yet the totality of all these
existences. The fluid personality that forms like foam on this Infinite, the
mobile ego with its attachments and repulsions, its likings and dislikings, its
fixed mental distinctions, is an effective image that veils and deforms to us
the one reality, Tao, the supreme All and Nothing. That can be touched only
by losing personality and its little structural forms in the unseizable universal
and eternal Presence and, this once achieved, we live in that a real life and
have another greater consciousness which makes us penetrate all things,
ourselves penetrable to all eternal influences. Here, as in the Gita, the highest
way would seem to be a complete openness and self-surrender to the
Eternal. “Your body is not your own,” says the Taoist thinker, “it is the
delegated image of God: your life is not your own, it is the delegated harmony
of God: your individuality is not your own, it is the delegated adaptability of
God.” And here too a vast perfection and liberated action are the dynamic
result of the soul's surrender. The works of ego personality are a separative
running counter to the bias of universal nature. This false movement must be
replaced by a wise and still passivity in the hands of the universal and eternal
Power, a passivity that makes us adaptable to the infinite action, in harmony
with its truth, plastic to the shaping breath of the Spirit. The man who has this
harmony may be motionless within and absorbed in silence, but his Self will
appear free from disguises, the divine Influence will be at work in him and
while he abides in tranquillity and an inward inaction, \s{nai\,skarmya}, yet he
will act with an irresistible power and myriads of things and beings will move
and gather under his influence. The impersonal force of the Self
Page 547

takes up his works, movements no longer deformed by ego, and sovereignly
acts through him for the keeping together and control of the world and its
peoples, \s{loka-sa\.ngrah\=arth\=aya}.
\par There is little difference between these experiences and the first
impersonal activity inculcated by the Gita. The Gita also demands of us
renunciation of desire, attachment and ego, transcendence of the lower
nature and the breaking up of our personality and its little formations. The
Gita also demands of us to live in the Self and Spirit, to see the Self and Spirit
in all and all in the Self and Spirit and all as the Self and Spirit. It demands of
us like the Taoist thinker to renounce our natural personality and its works
into the Self, the Spirit, the Eternal, the Brahman, \s{\=atmani sannyasya},
\s{brahma\,ni}. And there is this coincidence because that is always man's
highest and freest possible experience of a quietistic inner largeness and
silence reconciled with an outer dynamic active living, the two coexistent or
fused together in the impersonal infinite reality and illimitable action of the
one immortal Power and sole eternal Existence. But the Gita adds a phrase
of immense import that alters everything, \s{\=atmani atho mayi}. The demand
is to see all things in the self and then in “Me” the Ishwara, to renounce all
action into the Self, Spirit, Brahman and thence into the supreme Person, the
Purushottama. There is here a still greater and profounder complex of
spiritual experience, a larger transmutation of the significance of human life, a
more mystic and heart-felt sweep of the return of the stream to the ocean,
the restoration of personal works and the cosmic action to the Eternal
Worker. The stress on pure impersonality has this difficulty and
incompleteness for us that it reduces the inner person, the spiritual individual,
that persistent miracle of our inmost being, to a temporary, illusive and
mutable formation in the Infinite. The Infinite alone exists and except in a
passing play has no true regard on the soul of the living creature. There can
be no real and permanent relation between the soul in man and the Eternal, if
that soul is even as the always renewable body no more than a transient
phenomenon in the Infinite.
\par It is true that the ego and its limited personality are even such a
temporary and mutable formation of Nature and therefore it
Page 548

must be broken and we must feel ourselves one with all and infinite. But the
ego is not the real person; when it has been dissolved there still remains the
spiritual individual, there is still the eternal Jiva. The ego limitation disappears
and the soul lives in a profound unity with the One and feels its universal
unity with all things. And yet it is still our own soul that enjoys this expanse
and oneness. The universal action, even when it is felt as the action of one
and the same energy in all, even when it is experienced as the initiation and
movement of the Ishwara, still takes different forms in different souls of men,
\s{a\.m\'sa\,h san\=atana\,h}, and a different turn in their nature. The light of spiritual
knowledge, the manifold universal Shakti, the eternal delight of being stream
into us and around us, concentrate in the soul and flow out on the surrounding
world from each as from a centre of living spiritual consciousness whose
circumference is lost in the infinite. More, the spiritual individual remains as a
little universe of divine existence at once independent and inseparable from
the whole infinite universe of the divine self-manifestation of which we see a
petty portion around us. A portion of the Transcendent, creative, he creates
his own world around him even while he retains this cosmic consciousness in
which are all others. If it be objected that this is an illusion which must
disappear when he retreats into the transcendent Absolute, there is after all
no very certain certainty in that matter. For it is still the soul in man that is the
enjoyer of this release, as it was the living spiritual centre of the divine action
and manifestation; there is something more than the mere self-breaking of an
illusory shell of individuality in the Infinite. This mystery of our existence
signifies that what we are is not only a temporary name and form of the One,
but as we may say, a soul and spirit of the Divine Oneness. Our spiritual
individuality of which the ego is only a misleading shadow and projection in
the ignorance has or is a truth that persists beyond the ignorance; there is
something of us that dwells for ever in the supreme nature of the
Purushottama, \s{nivasi\,syasi mayi}. This is the profound comprehensiveness
of the teaching of the Gita that while it recognises the truth of the
universalised impersonality into which we enter by the extinction of ego,
\s{brahma-nirv\=a\,na},
Page 549

—for indeed without it there can be no liberation or at least no absolute
release,—it recognises too the persistent spiritual truth of our personality as a
factor of the highest experience. Not this natural but that divine and central
being in us is the eternal Jiva. It is the Ishwara, Vasudeva who is all things,
that takes up our mind and life and body for the enjoyment of the lower
Prakriti; it is the supreme Prakriti, the original spiritual nature of the supreme
Purusha that holds together the universe and appears in it as the Jiva. This
Jiva then is a portion of the Purushottama's original divine spiritual being, a
living power of the living Eternal. He is not merely a temporary form of lower
Nature, but an eternal portion of the Highest in his supreme Prakriti, an
eternal conscious ray of the divine existence and as everlasting as that
supernal Prakriti. One side of the highest perfection and status of our
liberated consciousness must then be to assume the true place of the Jiva in a
supreme spiritual Nature, there to dwell in the glory of the supreme Purusha
and there to have the joy of the eternal spiritual oneness.
\par This mystery of our being implies necessarily a similar supreme mystery
of the being of the Purushottama, \s{rahasyam uttamam}. It is not an
exclusive impersonality of the Absolute that is the highest secret. This highest
secret is the miracle of a supreme Person and apparent vast Impersonal that
are one, an immutable transcendent Self of all things and a Spirit that
manifests itself here at the very foundation of cosmos as an infinite and
multiple personality acting everywhere,—a Self and Spirit revealed to our
last, closest, profoundest experience as an illimitable Being who accepts us
and takes us to him, not into a blank of featureless existence, but most
positively, deeply, wonderfully into all Himself and in all the ways of his and
our conscious existence. This highest experience and this largest way of
seeing open a profound, moving and endless significance to our parts of
nature, our knowledge, will, heart's love and adoration, which is lost or
diminished if we put an exclusive stress on the impersonal, because that
stress suppresses or minimises or does not allow of the intensest fulfilment of
movements and powers that are a portion of our deepest nature, intensities
and
Page 550

luminosities that are attached to the closest essential fibres of our
self-experience. It is not the austerity of knowledge alone that can help us;
there is room and infinite room for the heart's love and aspiration illumined
and uplifted by knowledge, a more mystically clear, a greater calmly
passionate knowledge. It is by the perpetual unified closeness of our
heart-consciousness, mind-consciousness, all consciousness, \s{satata\.m
maccitta\,h}, that we get the widest, the deepest, the most integral experience
of our oneness with the Eternal. A nearest oneness in all the being,
profoundly individual in a divine passion even in the midst of universality, even
at the top of transcendence is here enjoined on the human soul as its way to
reach the Highest and its way to possess the perfection and the divine
consciousness to which it is called by its nature as a spirit. The intelligence
and will have to turn the whole existence in all its parts to the Ishwara, to the
divine Self and Master of that whole existence, \s{buddhi-yogam up\=a\'sritya}.
The heart has to cast all other emotion into the delight of oneness with him
and the love of Him in all creatures. The sense spiritualised has to see and
hear and feel him everywhere. The life has to be utterly his life in the Jiva.
All the actions have to proceed from his sole power and sole initiation in the
will, knowledge, organs of action, senses, vital parts, body. This way is deeply
impersonal because the separateness of ego is abolished for the soul
universalised and restored to transcendence. And yet it is intimately personal
because it soars to a transcendent passion and power of indwelling and
oneness. A featureless extinction may be a rigorous demand of the mind's
logic of self-annulment; it is not the last word of the supreme mystery,
\s{rahasyam uttamam}.
\par The refusal of Arjuna to persevere in his divinely appointed work
proceeded from the ego sense in him, \s{aha\.nk\=ara}. Behind it was a mixture
and confusion and tangled error of ideas and impulsions of the sattwic,
rajasic, tamasic ego, the vital nature's fear of sin and its personal
consequences, the heart's recoil from individual grief and suffering, the
clouded reason's covering of egoistic impulses by self-deceptive specious
pleas of right and virtue, our nature's ignorant shrinking from the ways of God
Page 551

because they seem other than the ways of man and impose things terrible
and unpleasant on his nervous and emotional parts and his intelligence. The
spiritual consequences will be infinitely worse now than before, now that a
higher truth and a greater way and spirit of action have been revealed to him,
if yet persisting in his egoism he perseveres in a vain and impossible refusal.
For it is a vain resolution, a futile recoil, since it springs only from a temporary
failure of strength, a strong but passing deviation from the principle of energy
of his inmost character, and is not the true will and way of his nature. If now
he casts down his arms, he will yet be compelled by that nature to resume
them when he sees the battle and slaughter go on without him, his abstention
a defeat of all for which he has lived, the cause for whose service he was
born weakened and bewildered by the absence or inactivity of its protagonist,
vanquished and afflicted by the cynical and unscrupulous strength of the
champions of a self-regarding unrighteousness and injustice. And in this
return there will be no spiritual virtue. It was a confusion of the ideas and
feelings of the ego mind that impelled his refusal; it will be his nature working
through a restoration of the characteristic ideas and feelings of the ego mind
that will compel him to annul his refusal. But whatever the direction, this
continued subjection to the ego will mean a worse, a more fatal spiritual
refusal, a perdition, \s{vina\,s\,ti}; for it will be a definite falling away from a
greater truth of his being than that which he has followed in the ignorance of
the lower nature. He has been admitted to a higher consciousness, a new
self-realisation, he has been shown the possibility of a divine instead of an
egoistic action; the gates have been opened before him of a divine and
spiritual in place of a merely intellectual, emotional, sensuous and vital life.
He is called to be no longer a great blind instrument, but a conscious soul and
an enlightened power and vessel of the Godhead.
\par For there is this possibility within us: there is open to us even at our
human highest this consummation and transcendence. The ordinary mind and
life of man is a half-enlightened and mostly an ignorant development and a
partial uncompleted manifestation of something concealed within him. There
is a
Page 552

godhead there concealed from himself, subliminal to his consciousness,
immobilised behind the obscure veil of a working that is not wholly his own
and the secret of which he has not yet mastered. He finds himself in the
world thinking and willing and feeling and acting and he takes himself
instinctively or intellectually conceives of himself or at least conducts his life
as a separate self-existent being who has the freedom of his thought and will
and feeling and action. He bears the burden of his sin and error and suffering
and takes the responsibility and merit of his knowledge and virtue; he claims
the right to satisfy his sattwic, rajasic or tamasic ego and arrogates the power
to shape his own destiny and to turn the world to his own uses. It is this idea
of himself through which Nature works in him, and she deals with him
according to his own conception, but fulfils all the time the will of the greater
Spirit within her. The error of this self-view of man is like most of his errors
the distortion of a truth, a distortion that creates a whole system of erroneous
and yet effective values. What is true of his spirit he attributes to his
ego-personality and gives it a false application, a false form and a mass of
ignorant consequences. The ignorance lies in this fundamental deficiency of
his surface consciousness that he identifies himself only with the outward
mechanical part of him which is a convenience of Nature and with so much
only of the soul as reflects and is reflected in these workings. He misses the
greater inner spirit within which gives to all his mind and life and creation and
action an unfulfilled promise and a hidden significance. A universal Nature
here obeys the power of the Spirit who is the master of the universe, shapes
each creature and determines its action according to the law of its own
nature, Swabhava, shapes man too and determines his action according to the
general law of nature of his kind, the law of a mental being emmeshed and
ignorant in the life and the body, shapes too each man and determines his
individual action according to the law of his own distinct type and the
variations of his own original swabhava. It is this universal Nature that forms
and directs the mechanical workings of the body and the instinctive
operations of our vital and nervous parts; and there our subjection to her
Page 553

is very obvious. And she has formed and directs the action too, hardly less
mechanical as things now are, of our sense-mind and will and intelligence.
Only, while in the animal the mind workings are a wholly mechanical
obedience to Prakriti, man has this distinction that he embodies a conscious
development in which the soul more actively participates, and that gives to his
outward mentality the sense, useful to him, indispensable, but very largely a
misleading sense, of a certain freedom and increasing mastery of his
instrumental nature. And it is especially misleading because it blinds him to
the hard fact of his bondage and his false idea of freedom prevents him from
finding a true liberty and lordship. For the freedom and mastery of man over
his nature are hardly even real and cannot be complete until he becomes
aware of the Divinity within him and is in possession of his own real self and
spirit other than the ego, \s{\=atmav\=an}. It is that which Nature is labouring to
express in mind and life and body; it is that which imposes on her this or that
law of being and working, Swabhava; it is that which shapes the outward
destiny and the evolution of the soul within us. It is therefore only when he is
in possession of his real self and spirit that his nature can become a conscious
instrument and enlightened power of the godhead.
\par For then, when we enter into that inmost self of our existence, we come
to know that in us and in all is the one Spirit and Godhead whom all Nature
serves and manifests and we ourselves are soul of this Soul, spirit of this
Spirit, our body his delegated image, our life a movement of the rhythm of his
life, our mind a sheath of his consciousness, our senses his instruments, our
emotions and sensations the seekings of his delight of being, our actions a
means of his purpose, our freedom only a shadow, suggestion or glimpse
while we are ignorant, but when we know him and ourselves a prolongation
and effective channel of his immortal freedom. Our masteries are a reflection
of his power at work, our best knowledge a partial light of his knowledge, the
highest most potent will of our spirit a projection and delegation of the will of
this Spirit in all things who is the Master and Soul of the universe. It is the
Lord seated in the heart
Page 554

of every creature who has been turning us in all our inner and outer action
during the ignorance as if mounted on a machine on the wheel of this Maya
of the lower Nature. And whether obscure in the Ignorance or luminous in
the Knowledge, it is for him in us and him in the world that we have our
existence. To live consciously and integrally in this knowledge and this truth is
to escape from ego and break out of Maya. All other highest dharmas are
only a preparation for this Dharma, and all Yoga is only a means by which
we can come first to some kind of union and finally, if we have the full light,
to an integral union with the Master and supreme Soul and Self of our
existence. The greatest Yoga is to take refuge from all the perplexities and
difficulties of our nature with this indwelling Lord of all Nature, to turn to him
with our whole being, with the life and body and sense and mind and heart
and understanding, with our whole dedicated knowledge and will and action,
\s{sarva-bh\=avena}, in every way of our conscious self and our instrumental
nature. And when we can at all times and entirely do this, then the divine
Light and Love and Power takes hold of us, fills both self and instruments
and leads us safe through all the doubts and difficulties and perplexities and
perils that beset our soul and our life, leads us to a supreme peace and the
spiritual freedom of our immortal and eternal status, \s{par\=a\.m \'s\=antim},
\s{sth\=ana\.m \'s\=a\'svatam}.
\par For after giving out all the laws, the dharmas, and the deepest essence of
its Yoga, after saying that beyond all the first secrets revealed to the mind of
man by the transforming light of spiritual knowledge, \s{guhy\=at}, this is a still
deeper more secret truth, \s{guhyataram}, the Gita suddenly declares that
there is yet a supreme word that it has to speak, \s{parama\.m vaca\,h}, and a
most secret truth of all, \s{sarva-guhyatamam}. This secret of secrets the
Teacher will tell to Arjuna as his highest good because he is the chosen and
beloved soul, \s{i\,s\,ta}. For evidently, as had already been declared by the
Upanishad, it is only the rare soul chosen by the Spirit for the revelation of his
very body, \s{tanu\.m sv\=am}, who can be admitted to this mystery, because he
alone is near enough in heart and mind and life to the Godhead to respond
truly to it in all his being and to make it a living practice. The last, the
Page 555

closing supreme word of the Gita expressing the highest mystery is spoken in
two brief, direct and simple slokas and these are left without farther comment
or enlargement to sink into the mind and reveal their own fullness of meaning
in the soul's experience. For it is alone this inner incessantly extending
experience that can make evident the infinite deal of meaning with which are
for ever pregnant these words in themselves apparently so slight and simple.
And we feel, as they are being uttered, that it was this for which the soul of
the disciple was being prepared all the time and the rest was only an
enlightening and enabling discipline and doctrine. Thus runs this secret of
secrets, the highest most direct message of the Ishwara. “Become
my-minded, my lover and adorer, a sacrificer to me, bow thyself to me, to me
thou shalt come, this is my pledge and promise to thee, for dear art thou to
me. Abandon all dharmas and take refuge in me alone. I will deliver thee
from all sin and evil, do not grieve.”
\par The Gita throughout has been insisting on a great and well-built discipline
of Yoga, a large and clearly traced philosophical system, on the Swabhava
and the Swadharma, on the sattwic law of life as leading out of itself by a
self-exceeding exaltation to a free spiritual dharma of immortal existence
utterly wide in its spaces and high-lifted beyond the limitation of even this
highest guna, on many rules and means and injunctions and conditions of
perfection, and now suddenly it seems to break out of its own structure and
says to the human soul, “Abandon all dharmas, give thyself to the Divine
alone, to the supreme Godhead above and around and within thee: that is all
that thou needest, that is the truest and greatest way, that is the real
deliverance.” The Master of the worlds in the form of the divine Charioteer
and Teacher of Kurukshetra has revealed to man the magnificent realities of
God and Self and Spirit and the nature of the complex world and the relation
of man's mind and life and heart and senses to the Spirit and the victorious
means by which through his own spiritual self-discipline and effort he can rise
out of mortality into immortality and out of his limited mental into his infinite
spiritual existence. And now speaking as the Spirit and Godhead in man and
in all things he says to him,
Page 556

“All this personal effort and self-discipline will not in the end be needed, all
following and limitation of rule and dharma can at last be thrown away as
hampering encumbrances if thou canst make a complete surrender to Me,
depend alone on the Spirit and Godhead within thee and all things and trust to
his sole guidance. Turn all thy mind to me and fill it with the thought of me
and my presence. Turn all thy heart to me, make thy every action, whatever
it be, a sacrifice and offering to me. That done, leave me to do my will with
thy life and soul and action; do not be grieved or perplexed by my dealings
with thy mind and heart and life and works or troubled because they do not
seem to follow the laws and dharmas man imposes on himself to guide his
limited will and intelligence. My ways are the ways of a perfect wisdom and
power and love that knows all things and combines all its movements in view
of a perfect eventual result; for it is refining and weaving together the many
threads of an integral perfection. I am here with thee in thy chariot of battle
revealed as the Master of Existence within and without thee and I repeat the
absolute assurance, the infallible promise that I will lead thee to myself
through and beyond all sorrow and evil. Whatever difficulties and perplexities
arise, be sure of this that I am leading thee to a complete divine life in the
universal and an immortal existence in the transcendent Spirit.”
\par The secret thing, \s{guhyam}, that all deep spiritual knowledge reveals to
us, mirrored in various teachings and justified in the soul's experience, is for
the Gita the secret of the spiritual self hidden within us of which mind and
external Nature are only manifestations or figures. It is the secret of the
constant relations between soul and Nature, Purusha and Prakriti, the secret
of an indwelling Godhead who is the lord of all existence and veiled from us
in its forms and movements. These are the truths taught in many ways by
Vedanta and Sankhya and Yoga and synthetised in the earlier chapters of the
Gita. And amidst all their apparent distinctions they are one truth and all the
different ways of Yoga are various means of spiritual self-discipline by which
our unquiet mind and blinded life are stilled and turned towards this
many-aspected One and the secret truth of self and God made
Page 557

so real to us and intimate that we can either consciously live and dwell in it or
lose our separate selves in the Eternal and no longer be compelled at all by
the mental Ignorance.
\par The more secret thing, \s{guhyataram}, developed by the Gita is the
profound reconciling truth of the divine Purushottama, at once self and
Purusha, supreme Brahman and a sole, intimate, mysterious, ineffable
Godhead. That gives to the thought a larger and more deeply understanding
foundation for an ultimate knowledge and to the spiritual experience a greater
and more fully comprehending and comprehensive Yoga. This deeper
mystery is founded on the secret of the supreme spiritual Prakriti and of the
Jiva, an eternal portion of the Divine in that eternal and this manifested
Nature and of one spirit and essence with him in his immutable
self-existence. This profounder knowledge escapes from the elementary
distinction of spiritual experience between the Beyond and what is here. For
the Transcendent beyond the worlds is at the same time Vasudeva who is all
things in all worlds; he is the Lord standing in the heart of every creature and
the self of all existences and the origin and supernal meaning of everything
that he has put forth in his Prakriti. He is manifested in his Vibhutis and he is
the Spirit in Time who compels the action of the world and the Sun of all
knowledge and the Lover and Beloved of the soul and the Master of all
works and sacrifice. The result of an inmost opening to this deeper, truer,
more secret mystery is the Gita's Yoga of integral knowledge, integral works
and integral bhakti. It is the simultaneous experience of spiritual universality
and a free and perfected spiritual individuality, of an entire union with God
and an entire dwelling in him as at once the frame of the soul's immortality
and the support and power of our liberated action in the world and the body.
\par And now there comes the supreme word and most secret thing of all,
\s{guhyatamam}, that the Spirit and Godhead is an Infinite free from all
dharmas and though he conducts the world according to fixed laws and leads
man through his dharmas of ignorance and knowledge, sin and virtue, right
and wrong, liking and disliking and indifference, pleasure and pain, joy and
Page 558

sorrow and the rejection of these opposites, through his physical and vital,
intellectual, emotional, ethical and spiritual forms and rules and standards, yet
the Spirit and Godhead transcends all these things, and if we too can cast
away all dependence on dharmas, surrender ourselves to this free and eternal
Spirit and, taking care only to keep ourselves absolutely and exclusively open
to him, trust to the light and power and delight of the Divine in us and,
unafraid and ungrieving, accept only his guidance, then that is the truest, the
greatest release and that brings the absolute and inevitable perfection of our
self and nature. This is the way offered to the chosen of the Spirit,—to those
only in whom he takes the greatest delight because they are nearest to him
and most capable of oneness and of being even as he, freely consenting and
concordant with Nature in her highest power and movement, universal in soul
consciousness, transcendent in the spirit.
\par For a time comes in spiritual development when we become aware that
all our effort and action are only our mental and vital reactions to the silent
and secret insistence of a greater Presence in and around us. It is borne in
upon us that all our Yoga, our aspiration and our endeavour are imperfect or
narrow forms, because disfigured or at least limited by the mind's
associations, demands, prejudgments, predilections, mistranslations or half
translations of a vaster truth. Our ideas and experiences and efforts are
mental images only of greatest things which would be done more perfectly,
directly, freely, largely, more in harmony with the universal and eternal will by
that Power itself in us if we could only put ourselves passively as instruments
in the hands of a supreme and absolute strength and wisdom. That Power is
not separate from us; it is our own self one with the self of all others and at
the same time a transcendent Being and an immanent Person. Our existence,
our action taken up into this greatest Existence would be no longer, as it
seems to us now, individually our own in a mental separation. It would be the
vast movement of an Infinity and an intimate ineffable Presence; it would be
the constant spontaneity of formation and expression in us of this deep
universal self and this transcendent Spirit. The Gita
Page 559

indicates that in order that that may wholly be, the surrender must be without
reservations; our Yoga, our life, our state of inner being must be determined
freely by this living Infinite, not predetermined by our mind's insistence on this
or that dharma or any dharma. The divine Master of the Yoga,
\s{yoge\'svara\,h k\,r\,s\,na\,h}, will then himself take up our Yoga and raise us to our
utmost possible perfection, not the perfection of any external or mental
standard or limiting rule, but vast and comprehensive, to the mind
incalculable. It will be a perfection developed by an all-seeing Wisdom
according to the whole truth, first indeed of our human swabhava, but
afterwards of a greater thing into which it will open, a spirit and power
illimitable, immortal, free and all-transmuting, the light and splendour of a
divine and infinite nature.
\par All must be given as material of that transmutation. An omniscient
consciousness will take up our knowledge and our ignorance, our truth and
our error, cast away their forms of insufficiency, \s{sarva-dharm\=an
parityajya}, and transform all into its infinite light. An almighty Power will
take up our virtue and sin, our right and wrong, our strength and our
weakness, cast away their tangled figures, \s{sarva-dharm\=an parityajya}, and
transform all into its transcendent purity and universal good and infallible
force. An ineffable Ananda will take up our petty joy and sorrow, our
struggling pleasure and pain, cast away their discordances and imperfect
rhythms, \s{sarva-dharm\=an parityajya}, and transform all into its transcendent
and universal unimaginable delight. All that all the Yogas can do will be done
and more; but it will be done in a greater seeing way, with a greater wisdom
and truth than any human teacher, saint or sage can give us. The inner
spiritual state to which this supreme Yoga will take us, will be above all that
is here and yet comprehensive of all things in this and other worlds, but with a
spiritual transformation of all, without limitation, without bondage,
\s{sarva-dharm\=an parityajya}. The infinite existence, consciousness and
delight of the Godhead in its calm silence and bright boundless activity will be
there, will be its essential, fundamental, universal stuff, mould and character.
And in that mould of infinity the Divine made manifest
Page 560

will overtly dwell, no longer concealed by his Yogamaya, and whenever and
as he wills build in us whatever shapes of the Infinite, translucent forms of
knowledge, thought, love, spiritual joy, power and action according to his
self-fulfilling will and immortal pleasure. And there will be no binding effect
on the free soul and the unaffected nature, no unescapable crystallising into
this or that inferior formula. For all the action will be executed by the power
of the Spirit in a divine freedom, \s{sarva-dharm\=an parityajya}. An unfallen
abiding in the transcendent Spirit, \s{para\.m dh\=ama}, will be the foundation
and the assurance of this spiritual state. An intimate understanding oneness
with universal being and all creatures, released from the evil and suffering of
the separative mind but wisely regardful of true distinctions, will be the
conditioning power. A constant delight, oneness and harmony of the eternal
individual here with the Divine and all that he is will be the effect of this
integral liberation. The baffling problems of our human existence of which
Arjuna's difficulty stands as an acute example, are created by our separative
personality in the Ignorance. This Yoga because it puts the soul of man into
its right relation with God and world-existence and makes our action God's,
the knowledge and will shaping and moving it his and our life the harmony of
a divine self-expression, is the way to their total disappearance.
\par The whole Yoga is revealed, the great word of the teaching is given, and
Arjuna the chosen human soul is once more turned, no longer in his egoistic
mind but in this greatest self-knowledge, to the divine action. The Vibhuti is
ready for the divine life in the human, his conscious spirit for the works of the
liberated soul, \s{muktasya karma}. Destroyed is the illusion of the mind; the
soul's memory of its self and its truth concealed so long by the misleading
shows and forms of our life has returned to it and become its normal
consciousness: all doubt and perplexity gone, it can turn to the execution of
the command and do faithfully whatever work for God and the world may be
appointed and apportioned to it by the Master of our being, the Spirit and
Godhead self-fulfilled in Time and universe.
Page 561

\par
\HN XXIII
\par
\ht The Core of the Gita's Meaning
\par\drop What then is the message of the Gita and what its working value,
its spiritual utility to the human mind of the present day after the long ages
that have elapsed since it was written and the great subsequent
transformations of thought and experience? The human mind moves always
forward, alters its viewpoint and enlarges its thought substance, and the
effect of these changes is to render past systems of thinking obsolete or,
when they are preserved, to extend, to modify and subtly or visibly to alter
their value. The vitality of an ancient doctrine consists in the extent to which
it naturally lends itself to such a treatment; for that means that whatever may
have been the limitations or the obsolescences of the form of its thought, the
truth of substance, the truth of living vision and experience on which its
system was built is still sound and retains a permanent validity and
significance. The Gita is a book that has worn extraordinarily well and it is
almost as fresh and still in its real substance quite as new, because always
renewable in experience, as when it first appeared in or was written into the
frame of the Mahabharata. It is still received in India as one of the great
bodies of doctrine that most authoritatively govern religious thinking and its
teaching acknowledged as of the highest value if not wholly accepted by
almost all shades of religious belief and opinion. Its influence is not merely
philosophic or academic but immediate and living, an influence both for
thought and action, and its ideas are actually at work as a powerful shaping
factor in the revival and renewal of a nation and a culture. It has even been
said recently by a great voice that all we need of spiritual truth for the
spiritual life is to be found in the Gita. It would be to encourage the
superstition of the book to take too literally that utterance. The truth of the
spirit is infinite and cannot be circumscribed in that manner. Still it
Page 562

may be said that most of the main clues are there and that after all the later
developments of spiritual experience and discovery we can still return to it for
a large inspiration and guidance. Outside India too it is universally
acknowledged as one of the world's great scriptures, although in Europe its
thought is better understood than its secret of spiritual practice. What is it
then that gives this vitality to the thought and the truth of the Gita?
\par The central interest of the Gita's philosophy and Yoga is its attempt, the
idea with which it sets out, continues and closes, to reconcile and even effect
a kind of unity between the inner spiritual truth in its most absolute and
integral realisation and the outer actualities of man's life and action. A
compromise between the two is common enough, but that can never be a
final and satisfactory solution. An ethical rendering of spirituality is also
common and has its value as a law of conduct; but that is a mental solution
which does not amount to a complete practical reconciliation of the whole
truth of spirit with the whole truth of life and it raises as many problems as it
solves. One of these is indeed the starting-point of the Gita; it sets out with an
ethical problem raised by a conflict in which we have on one side the dharma
of the man of action, a prince and warrior and leader of men, the protagonist
of a great crisis, of a struggle on the physical plane, the plane of actual life,
between the powers of right and justice and the powers of wrong and
injustice, the demand of the destiny of the race upon him that he shall resist
and give battle and establish even though through a terrible physical struggle
and a giant slaughter a new era and reign of truth and right and justice, and
on the other side the ethical sense which condemns the means and the action
as a sin, recoils from the price of individual suffering and social strife,
unsettling and disturbance and regards abstention from violence and battle as
the only way and the one right moral attitude. A spiritualised ethics insists on
Ahinsa, on non-injuring and non-killing as the highest law of spiritual conduct.
The battle, if it is to be fought out at all, must be fought on the spiritual plane
and by some kind of non-resistance or refusal of participation or only by soul
resistance, and if this does not succeed on the external plane,
Page 563

if the force of injustice conquers, the individual will still have preserved his
virtue and vindicated by his example the highest ideal. On the other hand a
more insistent extreme of the inner spiritual direction, passing beyond this
struggle between social duty and an absolutist ethical ideal, is apt to take the
ascetic turn and to point away from life and all its aims and standards of
action towards another and celestial or supracosmic state in which alone
beyond the perplexed vanity and illusion of man's birth and life and death
there can be a pure spiritual existence. The Gita rejects none of these things
in their place,—for it insists on the performance of the social duty, the
following of the dharma for the man who has to take his share in the common
action, accepts Ahinsa as part of the highest spiritual-ethical ideal and
recognises the ascetic renunciation as a way of spiritual salvation. And yet it
goes boldly beyond all these conflicting positions; greatly daring, it justifies all
life to the spirit as a significant manifestation of the one Divine Being and
asserts the compatibility of a complete human action and a complete spiritual
life lived in union with the Infinite, consonant with the highest Self, expressive
of the perfect Godhead.
\par All the problems of human life arise from the complexity of our
existence, the obscurity of its essential principle and the secrecy of the inmost
power that makes out its determinations and governs its purpose and its
processes. If our existence were of one piece, solely material-vital or solely
mental or solely spiritual, or even if the others were entirely or mainly
involved in one of these or were quite latent in our subconscient or our
superconscient parts, there would be nothing to perplex us; the material and
vital law would be imperative or the mental would be clear to its own pure
and unobstructed principle or the spiritual self-existent and self-sufficient to
spirit. The animals are aware of no problems; a mental god in a world of pure
mentality would admit none or would solve them all by the purity of a mental
rule or the satisfaction of a rational harmony; a pure spirit would be above
them and self-content in the infinite. But the existence of man is a triple web,
a thing mysteriously physical-vital, mental and spiritual at once, and he knows
not what are
Page 564

the true relations of these things, which the real reality of his life and his
nature, whither the attraction of his destiny and where the sphere of his
perfection.
\par Matter and life are his actual basis, the thing from which he starts and on
which he stands and whose requirement and law he has to satisfy if he would
exist at all on earth and in the body. The material and vital law is a rule of
survival, of struggle, of desire and possession, of self-assertion and the
satisfaction of the body, the life and the ego. All the intellectual reasoning in
the world, all the ethical idealism and spiritual absolutism of which the higher
faculties of man are capable cannot abolish the reality and claim of our vital
and material base or prevent the race from following under the imperative
compulsion of Nature its aims and the satisfaction of its necessities or from
making its important problems a great and legitimate part of human destiny
and human interest and endeavour. And the intelligence of man even, failing
to find any sustenance in spiritual or ideal solutions that solve everything else
but the pressing problems of our actual human life, often turns away from
them to an exclusive acceptance of the vital and material existence and the
reasoned or instinctive pursuit of its utmost possible efficiency, well-being and
organised satisfaction. A gospel of the will to live or the will to power or of a
rationalised vital and material perfection becomes the recognised dharma of
the human race and all else is considered either a pretentious falsity or a quite
subsidiary thing, a side issue of a minor and dependent consequence.
\par Matter and life however in spite of their insistence and great importance
are not all that man is, nor can he wholly accept mind as nothing but a
servant of the life and body admitted to certain pure enjoyments of its own as
a sort of reward for its service or regard it as no more than an extension and
flower of the vital urge, an ideal luxury contingent upon the satisfaction of the
material life. The mind much more intimately than the body and the life is the
man, and the mind as it develops insists more and more on making the body
and the life an instrument—an indispensable instrument and yet a
considerable obstacle, otherwise there would be no problem—for its own
characteristic
Page 565

satisfactions and self-realisation. The mind of man is not only a vital and
physical, but an intellectual, aesthetic, ethical, psychic, emotional and dynamic
intelligence, and in the sphere of each of its tendencies its highest and
strongest nature is to strain towards some absolute of them which the frame
of life will not allow it to capture wholly and embody and make here entirely
real. The mental absolute of our aspiration remains as a partly grasped
shining or fiery ideal which the mind can make inwardly very present to itself,
inwardly imperative on its effort, and can even effectuate partly, but not
compel all the facts of life into its image. There is thus an absolute, a high
imperative of intellectual truth and reason sought for by our intellectual being;
there is an absolute, an imperative of right and conduct aimed at by the
ethical conscience; there is an absolute, an imperative of love, sympathy,
compassion, oneness yearned after by our emotional and psychic nature;
there is an absolute, an imperative of delight and beauty quivered to by the
aesthetic soul; there is an absolute, an imperative of inner self-mastery and
control of life laboured after by the dynamic will; all these are there together
and impinge upon the absolute, the imperative of possession and pleasure and
safe embodied existence insisted on by the vital and physical mind. And the
human intelligence, since it is not able to realise entirely any of these things,
much less all of them together, erects in each sphere many standards and
dharmas, standards of truth and reason, of right and conduct, of delight and
beauty, of love, sympathy and oneness, of self-mastery and control, of
self-preservation and possession and vital efficiency and pleasure, and tries to
impose them on life. The absolute shining ideals stand far above and beyond
our capacity and rare individuals approximate to them as best they can: the
mass follow or profess to follow some less magnificent norm, some
established possible and relative standard. Human life as a whole undergoes
the attraction and yet rejects the ideal. Life resists in the strength of some
obscure infinite of its own and wears down or breaks down any established
mental and moral order. And this must be either because the two are quite
different and disparate though meeting and interacting principles or because
mind has not the
Page 566

clue to the whole reality of life. The clue must be sought in something
greater, an unknown something above the mentality and morality of the
human creature.
\par The mind itself has the vague sense of some surpassing factor of this
kind and in the pursuit of its absolutes frequently strikes against it. It glimpses
a state, a power, a presence that is near and within and inmost to it and yet
immeasurably greater and singularly distant and above it; it has a vision of
something more essential, more absolute than its own absolutes, intimate,
infinite, one, and it is that which we call God, Self or Spirit. This then the mind
attempts to know, enter, touch and seize wholly, to approach it or become it,
to arrive at some kind of unity or lose itself in a complete identity with that
mystery, \s{\=a\'scaryam}. The difficulty is that this spirit in its purity seems
something yet farther than the mental absolutes from the actualities of life,
something not translatable by mind into its own terms, much less into those of
life and action. Therefore we have the intransigent absolutists of the spirit
who reject the mental and condemn the material being and yearn after a pure
spiritual existence happily purchased by the dissolution of all that we are in
life and mind, a Nirvana. The rest of spiritual effort is for these fanatics of
the Absolute a mental preparation or a compromise, a spiritualising of life and
mind as much as possible. And because the difficulty most constantly
insistent on man's mentality in practice is that presented by the claims of his
vital being, by life and conduct and action, the direction taken by this
preparatory endeavour consists mainly in a spiritualising of the ethical
supported by the psychical mind—or rather it brings in the spiritual power and
purity to aid these in enforcing their absolute claim and to impart a greater
authority than life allows to the ethical ideal of right and truth of conduct or
the psychic ideal of love and sympathy and oneness. These things are helped
to some highest expression, given their broadest luminous basis by an assent
of the reason and will to the underlying truth of the absolute oneness of the
spirit and therefore the essential oneness of all living creatures. This kind of
spirituality linked on in some way to the demands of the normal mind of man,
Page 567

persuaded to the acceptance of useful social duty and current law of social
conduct, popularised by cult and ceremony and image is the outward
substance of the world's greater religions. These religions have their
individual victories, call in some ray of a higher light, impose some shadow of
a larger spiritual or semi-spiritual rule, but cannot effect a complete victory,
end flatly in a compromise and in the act of compromise are defeated by life.
Its problems remain and even recur in their fiercest forms—even such as this
grim problem of Kurukshetra. The idealising intellect and ethical mind hope
always to eliminate them, to discover some happy device born of their own
aspiration and made effective by their own imperative insistence, which will
annihilate this nether untoward aspect of life; but it endures and is not
eliminated. The spiritualised intelligence on the other hand offers indeed by
the voice of religion the promise of some victorious millennium hereafter, but
meanwhile half convinced of terrestrial impotence, persuaded that the soul is
a stranger and intruder upon earth, declares that after all not here in the life
of the body or in the collective life of mortal man but in some immortal
Beyond lies the heaven or the Nirvana where alone is to be found the true
spiritual existence.
\par It is here that the Gita intervenes with a restatement of the truth of the
Spirit, of the Self, of God and of the world and Nature. It extends and
remoulds the truth evolved by a later thought from the ancient Upanishads
and ventures with assured steps on an endeavour to apply its solving power
to the problem of life and action. The solution offered by the Gita does not
disentangle all the problem as it offers itself to modern mankind; as stated
here to a more ancient mentality, it does not meet the insistent pressure of the
present mind of man for a collective advance, does not respond to its cry for
a collective life that will at last embody a greater rational and ethical and if
possible even a dynamic spiritual ideal. Its call is to the individual who has
become capable of a complete spiritual existence; but for the rest of the race
it prescribes only a gradual advance, to be wisely effected by following out
faithfully with more and more of intelligence and moral purpose and with a
final turn to
Page 568

spirituality the law of their nature. Its message touches the other smaller
solutions but, even when it accepts them partly, it is to point them beyond
themselves to a higher and more integral secret into which as yet only the
few individuals have shown themselves fit to enter.
\par The Gita's message to the mind that follows after the vital and material
life is that all life is indeed a manifestation of the universal Power in the
individual, a derivation from the Self, a ray from the Divine, but actually it
figures the Self and the Divine veiled in a disguising Maya, and to pursue the
lower life for its own sake is to persist in a stumbling path and to enthrone our
nature's obscure ignorance and not at all to find the true truth and complete
law of existence. A gospel of the will to live, the will to power, of the
satisfaction of desire, of the glorification of mere force and strength, of the
worship of the ego and its vehement acquisitive self-will and tireless
self-regarding intellect is the gospel of the Asura and it can lead only to some
gigantic ruin and perdition. The vital and material man must accept for his
government a religious and social and ideal dharma by which, while satisfying
desire and interest under right restrictions, he can train and subdue his lower
personality and scrupulously attune it to a higher law both of the personal and
the communal life.
\par The Gita's message to the mind occupied with the pursuit of intellectual,
ethical and social standards, the mind that insists on salvation by the
observance of established dharmas, the moral law, social duty and function or
the solutions of the liberated intelligence, is that this is indeed a very
necessary stage, the dharma has indeed to be observed and, rightly observed,
can raise the stature of the spirit and prepare and serve the spiritual life, but
still it is not the complete and last truth of existence. The soul of man has to
go beyond to some more absolute dharma of man's spiritual and immortal
nature. And this can only be done if we repress and get rid of the ignorant
formulations of the lower mental elements and the falsehood of egoistic
personality, impersonalise the action of the intelligence and will, live in the
identity of the one self in all, break out of all ego-moulds into the
Page 569

impersonal spirit. The mind moves under the limiting compulsion of the triple
lower nature, it erects its standards in obedience to the tamasic, rajasic or at
highest the sattwic qualities; but the destiny of the soul is a divine perfection
and liberation and that can only be based in the freedom of our highest self,
can only be found by passing through its vast impersonality and universality
beyond mind into the integral light of the immeasurable Godhead and supreme
Infinite who is beyond all dharmas.
\par The Gita's message to those, absolutist seekers of the Infinite, who carry
impersonality to an exclusive extreme, entertain an intolerant passion for the
extinction of life and action and would have as the one ultimate aim and ideal
an endeavour to cease from all individual being in the pure silence of the
ineffable Spirit, is that this is indeed one path of journey and entry into the
Infinite, but the most difficult, the ideal of inaction a dangerous thing to hold
up by precept or example before the world, this way, though great, yet not
the best way for man and this knowledge, though true, yet not the integral
knowledge. The Supreme, the all-conscious Self, the Godhead, the Infinite is
not solely a spiritual existence remote and ineffable; he is here in the universe
at once hidden and expressed through man and the gods and through all
beings and in all that is. And it is by finding him not only in some immutable
silence but in the world and its beings and in all self and in all Nature, it is by
raising to an integral as well as to a highest union with him all the activities of
the intelligence, the heart, the will, the life that man can solve at once his
inner riddle of self and God and the outer problem of his active human
existence. Made Godlike, God-becoming, he can enjoy the infinite breadth of
a supreme spiritual consciousness that is reached through works no less than
through love and knowledge. Immortal and free, he can continue his human
action from that highest level and transmute it into a supreme and
all-embracing divine activity,—that indeed is the ultimate crown and
significance here of all works and living and sacrifice and the world's
endeavour.
\par This highest message is first for those who have the strength to follow
after it, the master men, the great spirits, the God-knowers,
Page 570

God-doers, God-lovers who can live in God and for God and do their work
joyfully for him in the world, a divine work uplifted above the restless
darkness of the human mind and the false limitations of the ego. At the same
time, and here we get the gleam of a larger promise which we may even
extend to the hope of a collective turn towards perfection,—for if there is
hope for man, why should there not be hope for mankind?—the Gita declares
that all can if they will, even to the lowest and sinfullest among men, enter
into the path of this Yoga. And if there is a true self-surrender and an
absolute unegoistic faith in the indwelling Divinity, success is certain in this
path. The decisive turn is needed; there must be an abiding belief in the Spirit,
a sincere and insistent will to live in the Divine, to be in self one with him and
in Nature—where too we are an eternal portion of his being—one with his
greater spiritual Nature, God-possessed in all our members and Godlike.
\par The Gita in the development of its idea raises many issues, such as the
determinism of Nature, the significance of the universal manifestation and the
ultimate status of the liberated soul, questions that have been the subject of
unending and inconclusive debate. It is not necessary in this series of essays
of which the object is a scrutiny and positive affirmation of the substance of
the Gita and a disengaging of its contribution to the abiding spiritual thought of
humanity and its kernel of living practice, to enter far into these discussions or
to consider where we may differ from its standpoint or conclusions, make
any reserves in our assent or even, strong in later experience, go beyond its
metaphysical teaching or its Yoga. It will be sufficient to close with a
formulation of the living message it still brings for man the eternal seeker and
discoverer to guide him through the present circuits and the possible steeper
ascent of his life up to the luminous heights of his spirit.
Page 571

\par
\HN XXIV
\par
\ht The Message of the Gita
\par\dropquote “The secret of action,” so we might summarise the message
of the Gita, the word of its divine Teacher, “is one with the secret of all life
and existence. Existence is not merely a machinery of Nature, a wheel of
law in which the soul is entangled for a moment or for ages; it is a constant
manifestation of the Spirit. Life is not for the sake of life alone, but for God,
and the living soul of man is an eternal portion of the Godhead. Action is for
self-finding, for self-fulfilment, for self-realisation and not only for its own
external and apparent fruits of the moment or the future. There is an inner
law and meaning of all things dependent on the supreme as well as the
manifested nature of the self; the true truth of works lies there and can be
represented only incidentally, imperfectly and disguised by ignorance in the
outer appearances of the mind and its action. The supreme, the faultless
largest law of action is therefore to find out the truth of your own highest and
inmost existence and live in it and not to follow any outer standard and
dharma. All life and action must be till then an imperfection, a difficulty, a
struggle and a problem. It is only by discovering your true self and living
according to its true truth, its real reality that the problem can be finally
solved, the difficulty and struggle overpassed and your doings perfected in the
security of the discovered self and spirit turn into a divinely authentic action.
Know then your self; know your true self to be God and one with the self of
all others; know your soul to be a portion of God. Live in what you know; live
in the self, live in your supreme spiritual nature, be united with God and
Godlike. Offer, first, all your actions as a sacrifice to the Highest and the One
in you and to the Highest and the One in the world; deliver last all you are
and do into his hands for the supreme and universal spirit to do through you
his own will and works in the world. This is the solution that I present to you
and in the end you will find that there is no other.”
Page 572

\par Here it is necessary to state the Gita's view of the fundamental
opposition on which like all Indian teaching it takes its position. This finding of
the true self, this knowledge of the Godhead within us and all is not an easy
thing; nor is it an easy thing either to turn this knowledge, even though seen
by the mind, into the stuff of our consciousness and the whole condition of
our action. All action is determined by the effective state of our being, and
the effective state of our being is determined by the state of our constant
self-seeing will and active consciousness and by its basis of kinetic
movement. It is what we see and believe with our whole active nature
ourselves to be and our relations with the world to mean, it is our faith, our
\s{\'sraddh\=a}, that makes us what we are. But the consciousness of man is of
a double kind and corresponds to a double truth of existence; for there is a
truth of the inner reality and a truth of the outer appearance. According as he
lives in one or the other, he will be a mind dwelling in human ignorance or a
soul founded in divine knowledge.
\par In its outer appearance the truth of existence is solely what we call
Nature or Prakriti, a Force that operates as the whole law and mechanism of
being, creates the world which is the object of our mind and senses and
creates too the mind and senses as a means of relation between the creature
and the objective world in which he lives. In this outer appearance man in his
soul, his mind, his life, his body seems to be a creature of Nature
differentiated from others by a separation of his body, life and mind and
especially by his ego-sense—that subtle mechanism constructed for him that
he may confirm and centralise his consciousness of all this strong
separateness and difference. All in him, his soul of mind and its action as well
as the functioning of his life and body, is very evidently determined by the law
of his nature, cannot get outside of it, cannot operate otherwise. He attributes
indeed a certain freedom to his personal will, the will of his ego; but that in
reality amounts to nothing, since his ego is only a sense which makes him
identify himself with the creation that Nature has made of him, with the
varying mind and life and body she has constructed. His ego is itself a
product of her workings, and as is the nature of his ego, so will be the nature
of its will and
Page 573

according to that he must act and he can no other.
\par This then is man's ordinary consciousness of himself, this his faith in his
own being, that he is a creature of Nature, a separate ego establishing
whatever relations with others and with the world, making whatever
development of himself, satisfying whatever will, desire, idea of his mind may
be permissible in her circle and consonant with her intention or law in his
existence.
\par There is, however, something in man's consciousness which does not fall
in with the rigidity of this formula; he has a faith, which grows greater as his
soul develops, in another and an inner reality of existence. In this inner reality
the truth of existence is no longer Nature but Soul and Spirit, Purusha rather
than Prakriti. Nature herself is only a power of Spirit, Prakriti the force of the
Purusha. A Spirit, a Self, a Being one in all is the master of this world which
is only his partial manifestation. That Spirit is the upholder of Nature and her
action and the giver of the sanction by which alone her law becomes
imperative and her force and its ways operative. That Spirit within her is the
Knower who illuminates her and makes her conscient in us; his is the
immanent and superconscient Will that inspires and motives her workings.
The soul in man, a portion of this Divinity, shares his nature. Our nature is our
soul's manifestation, operates by its sanction and embodies its secret
self-knowledge and self-consciousness and its will of being in her motions
and forms and changes.
\par The real soul and self of us is hidden from our intelligence by its
ignorance of inner things, by a false identification, by an absorption in our
outward mechanism of mind, life and body. But if the active soul of man can
once draw back from this identification with its natural instruments, if it can
see and live in the entire faith of its inner reality, then all is changed to it, life
and existence take on another appearance, action a different meaning and
character. Our being then becomes no longer this little egoistic creation of
Nature, but the largeness of a divine, immortal and spiritual Power. Our
consciousness becomes no longer that of this limited and struggling mental
and vital creature, but an infinite, divine and spiritual consciousness.
Page 574

And our will and action too are no longer that of this bounded personality and
its ego, but a divine and spiritual will and action, the will and power of the
Universal, the Supreme, the All-Self and Spirit acting freely through the
human figure.
\par “This is the great change and transfiguration,” runs the message of the
Godhead in man, the Avatar, the divine Teacher, “to which I call the elect,
and the elect are all who can turn their will away from the ignorance of the
natural instruments to the soul's deepest experience, its knowledge of the
inner self and spirit, its contact with the Godhead, its power to enter into the
Divine. The elect are all who can accept this faith and this greater law. It is
difficult indeed to accept for the human intellect attached always to its own
cloud-forms and half lights of ignorance and to the yet obscurer habits of
man's mental, nervous and physical parts; but once received it is a great and
sure and saving way, because it is identical with the true truth of man's being
and it is the authentic movement of his inmost and supreme nature.
\par “But the change is a very great one, an enormous transformation, and it
cannot be done without an entire turning and conversion of your whole being
and nature. There will be needed a complete consecration of your self and
your nature and your life to the Highest and to nothing else but the Highest;
for all must be held only for the sake of the Highest, nothing accepted except
as it is in God and a form of God and for the sake of the Divine. There will
be needed an admission of new truth, an entire turn and giving of your mind
to a new knowledge of self and others and world and God and soul and
Nature, a knowledge of oneness, a knowledge of universal Divinity, which
will be at first an acceptance by the understanding but must become in the
end a vision, a consciousness, a permanent state of the soul and the frame of
its movements.
\par “There will be needed a will that shall make this new knowledge, vision,
consciousness a motive of action and the sole motive. And it must be the
motive not of an action grudging, limited, confined to a few necessary
operations of Nature or to the few things that seem helpful to a formal
perfection, apposite to a religious turn or to an individual salvation, but rather
all action of
Page 575

human life taken up by the equal spirit and done for the sake of God and the
good of all creatures. There will be needed an uplifting of the heart in a single
aspiration to the Highest, a single love of the Divine Being, a single
God-adoration. And there must be a widening too of the calmed and
enlightened heart to embrace God in all beings. There will be needed a
change of the habitual and normal nature of man as he is now to a supreme
and divine spiritual nature. There will be needed in a word a Yoga which
shall be at once a Yoga of integral knowledge, a Yoga of the integral will and
its works, a Yoga of integral love, adoration and devotion and a Yoga of an
integral spiritual perfection of the whole being and of all its parts and states
and powers and motions.
\par “What then is this knowledge that will have to be admitted by the
understanding, supported by the soul's faith and made real and living to the
mind, heart and life? It is the knowledge of the supreme Soul and Spirit in its
oneness and its wholeness. It is the knowledge of One who is for ever,
beyond Time and Space and name and form and world, high beyond his own
personal and impersonal levels and yet from whom all this proceeds, One
whom all manifests in manifold Nature and her multitude of figures. It is the
knowledge of him as an impersonal eternal immutable Spirit, the calm and
limitless thing we call Self, infinite, equal and always the same, unaffected
and unmodified and unchanged amid all this constant changing and all this
multitude of individual personalities and soul powers and Nature powers and
the forms and forces and eventualities of this transitory and apparent
existence. It is the knowledge of him at the same time as the Spirit and
Power who seems ever mutable in Nature, the Inhabitant who shapes himself
to every form and modifies himself to every grade and degree and activity of
his power, the Spirit who, becoming all that is even while he is for ever
infinitely more than all that is, dwells in man and animal and thing, subject and
object, soul and mind and life and matter, every existence and every force
and every creature.
\par “It is not by insisting on this or that side only of the truth that you can
practise this Yoga. The Divine whom you have to seek, the Self whom you
have to discover, the supreme Soul of whom
Page 576

your soul is an eternal portion, is simultaneously all these things; you have to
know them simultaneously in a supreme oneness, enter into all of them at
once and in all states and all things see Him alone. If he were solely the Spirit
mutable in Nature, there would be only an eternal and universal becoming. If
you limit your faith and knowledge to that one aspect, you will never go
beyond your personality and its constant changeful figures; on such a
foundation you would be bound altogether in the revolutions of Nature. But
you are not merely a succession of soul moments in Time. There is an
impersonal self in you which supports the stream of your personality and is
one with God's vast and impersonal spirit. And incalculable beyond this
impersonality and personality, dominating these two constant poles of what
you are here, you are eternal and transcendent in the Eternal Transcendence.
\par “If, again, there were only the truth of an eternal impersonal self that
neither acts nor creates, then the world and your soul would be illusions
without any real basis. If you limit your faith and knowledge to this one lonely
aspect, the renunciation of life and action is your only resource. But God in
the world and you in the world are realities; the world and you are true and
actual powers and manifestations of the Supreme. Therefore accept life and
action and do not reject them. One with God in your impersonal self and
essence, an eternal portion of the Godhead turned to him by the love and
adoration of your spiritual personality for its own Infinite, make of your
natural being what it is intended to be, an instrument of works, a channel, a
power of the Divine. That it always is in its truth, but now unconsciously and
imperfectly, through the lower nature, doomed to a disfigurement of the
Godhead by your ego. Make it consciously and perfectly and without any
distortion by ego a power of the Divine in his supreme spiritual nature and a
vehicle of his will and his works. In this way you will live in the integral truth
of your own being and you will possess the integral God-union, the whole and
flawless Yoga.
\par “The Supreme is the Purushottama, eternal beyond all manifestation,
infinite beyond all limitation by Time or Space or Causality or any of his
numberless qualities and features. But
Page 577

this does not mean that in his supreme eternity he is unconnected with all that
happens here, cut off from world and Nature, aloof from all these beings. He
is the supreme ineffable Brahman, he is impersonal self, he is all personal
existences. Spirit here and life and matter, soul and Nature and the works of
Nature are aspects and movements of his infinite and eternal existence. He is
the supreme transcendent Spirit and all comes into manifestation from him
and are his forms and his self-powers. As the one self he is here
all-pervasive and equal and impersonal in man and animal and thing and
object and every force of Nature. He is the supreme Soul and all souls are
tireless flames of this one Soul. All living beings are in their spiritual
personality deathless portions of the one Person or Purusha. He is the eternal
Master of all manifested existence, Lord of the worlds and their creatures.
He is the omnipotent originator of all actions, not bound by his works, and to
him go all action and effort and sacrifice. He is in all and all are in him; he
has become all and yet too he is above all and not limited by his creations. He
is the transcendent Divine; he descends as the Avatar; he is manifest by his
power in the Vibhuti; he is the Godhead secret in every human being. All the
gods whom men worship are only personalities and forms and names and
mental bodies of the one Divine Existence.
\par “The Supreme has manifested the world from his spiritual essence and in
his own infinite existence and manifested himself too variously in the world.
All things are his powers and figures and to the powers and figures of him
there is no end, because he himself is infinite. As a pervading and containing
impersonal self-existence he informs and sustains equally and without any
partiality, preference or attachment to any person or thing or happening or
feature all this infinite manifestation in Time and the universe. This pure and
equal Self does not act, but supports impartially all the action of things. And
yet it is the Supreme, but as the cosmic Spirit and the Time Spirit, who wills
and conducts and determines the action of the world through his multitudinous
power-to-be, that power of the Spirit which we call Nature. He creates,
sustains and destroys his creations. He is seated too in the heart of every
living creature and from there as a secret
Page 578

Power in the individual, no less than from his universal presence in the
Cosmos, he originates by force of Nature, manifests some line of his mystery
in quality of nature and in executive energy of nature, shapes each thing and
being separately according to its kind and initiates and upholds all action. It is
this transcendent first origination from the Supreme and this constant
universal and individual manifestation of Him in things and beings which
makes the complex character of the cosmos.
\par “There are always these three eternal states of the Divine Being. There
is always and for ever this one eternal immutable self-existence which is the
basis and support of existent things. There is always and for ever this Spirit
mutable in Nature manifested by her as all these existences. There is always
and for ever this transcendent Divine who can be both of these others at
once, can be a pure and silent Spirit and at the same time the active soul and
life of the cycles of the universe, because he is something other and more
than these two whether taken separately or together. In us is the Jiva, a spirit
of this Spirit, a conscious power of the Supreme. He is one who carries in his
deepest self the whole of the immanent Divine and in Nature lives in the
universal Divine,—no temporary creation but an eternal soul acting and
moving in the eternal Self, in the eternal Infinite.
\par “This conscient soul in us can adopt either of these three states of the
Spirit. Man can live here in the mutability of Nature and in that alone.
Ignorant of his real self, ignorant of the Godhead within him, he knows only
Nature: he sees her as a mechanical executive and creative Force and sees
himself and others as her creations,—egos, separated existences in her
universe. It is thus, superficially, that he now lives and, while it is so and until
he exceeds this outer consciousness and knows what is within him, all his
thought and science can only be a shadow of light thrown upon screens and
surfaces. This ignorance is possible, is even imposed, because the Godhead
within is hidden by the veil of his own power. His greater reality is lost to our
view by the completeness with which he has identified himself in a partial
appearance with his creations and images and absorbed
Page 579

the created mind in the deceptive workings of his own Nature. And it is
possible also because the real, the eternal, the spiritual Nature which is the
secret of things in themselves is not manifest in their outward phenomena.
The Nature which we see when we look outwards, the Nature which acts in
our mind and body and senses is a lower Force, a derivation, a Magician who
creates figures of the Spirit but hides the Spirit in its figures, conceals the
truth and makes men look upon masks, a Force which is only capable of a
sum of secondary and depressed values, not of the full power and glory and
ecstasy and sweetness of the manifestation of the Divine. This Nature in us
is a Maya of the ego, a tangle of the dualities, a web of ignorance and the
three gunas. And so long as the soul of man lives in the surface fact of mind
and life and body and not in his self and spirit, he cannot see God and himself
and the world as they really are, cannot overcome this Maya, but must do
what he can with its terms and figures.
\par “It is possible by drawing back from the lower turn of his nature in which
man now lives, to awake from this light that is darkness and live in the
luminous truth of the eternal and immutable self-existence. Man then is no
longer bound up in his narrow prison of personality, no longer sees himself as
this little I that thinks and acts and feels and struggles and labours for a little.
He is merged in the vast and free impersonality of the pure spirit; he
becomes the Brahman; he knows himself as one with the one self in all
things. He is no longer aware of ego, no longer troubled by the dualities, no
longer feels anguish of grief or disturbance of joy, is no longer shaken by
desire, is no longer troubled by sin or limited by virtue. Or if the shadows of
these things remain, he sees and knows them only as Nature working in her
own qualities and does not feel them to be the truth of himself in which he
lives. Nature alone acts and works out her mechanical figures: but the pure
spirit is silent, inactive and free. Calm, untouched by her workings, it regards
them with a perfect equality and knows itself to be other than these things.
This spiritual state brings with it a still peace and freedom but not the
dynamic divinity, not the integral perfection; it is a great step,
Page 580

but it is not the integral God-knowledge and self-knowledge.
\par “A perfect perfection comes only by living in the supreme and the whole
Divine. Then the soul of man is united with the Godhead of which it is a
portion; then it is one with all beings in the self and spirit, one with them both
in God and in Nature; then it is not only free but complete, plunged in the
supreme felicity, ready for its ultimate perfection. He still sees the self as an
eternal and changeless Spirit silently supporting all things; but he sees also
Nature no longer as a mere mechanical force that works out things according
to the mechanism of the gunas, but as a power of the Spirit and the force of
God in manifestation. He sees that the lower Nature is not the inmost truth of
the spirit's action; he becomes aware of a highest spiritual nature of the
Divine in which is contained the source and the yet to be realised greater
truth of all that is imperfectly figured now in mind, life and body. Arisen from
the lower mental to this supreme spiritual nature, he is delivered there from
all ego. He knows himself as a spiritual being, in his essence one with all
existences and in his active nature a power of the one Godhead and an
eternal soul of the transcendent Infinite. He sees all in God and God in all; he
sees all things as Vasudeva. He is delivered from the dualities of joy and
grief, from the pleasant and the unpleasant, from desire and disappointment,
from sin and virtue. All henceforth is to his conscious sight and sense the will
and working of the Divine. He lives and acts as a soul and portion of the
universal consciousness and power; he is filled with the transcendent divine
delight, a spiritual Ananda. His action becomes the divine action and his
status the highest spiritual status.
\par
\tstar
\par “This is the solution, this the salvation, this the perfection that I offer to
all those who can listen to a divine voice within them and are capable of this
faith and knowledge. But to climb to this pre-eminent condition the first
necessity, the original radical step is to turn away from all that belongs to
your lower Nature
Page 581

and fix yourself by concentration of the will and intelligence on that which is
higher than either will or intelligence, higher than mind and heart and sense
and body. And first of all you must turn to your own eternal and immutable
self, impersonal and the same in all creatures. So long as you live in ego and
mental personality, you will always spin endlessly in the same rounds and
there can be no real issue. Turn your will inward beyond the heart and its
desires and the sense and its attractions; lift it upward beyond the mind and
its associations and attachments and its bounded wish and thought and
impulse. Arrive at something within you that is eternal, ever unchanged, calm,
unperturbed, equal, impartial to all things and persons and happenings, not
affected by any action, not altered by the figures of Nature. Be that, be the
eternal self, be the Brahman. If you can become that by a permanent spiritual
experience, you will have an assured basis on which you can stand delivered
from the limitations of your mind-created personality, secure against any fall
from peace and knowledge, free from ego.
\par “Thus to impersonalise your being is not possible so long as you nurse
and cherish and cling to your ego or anything that belongs to it. Desire and
the passions that arise from desire are the principal sign and knot of ego. It is
desire that makes you go on saying I and mine and subjects you through a
persistent egoism to satisfaction and dissatisfaction, liking and disliking, hope
and despair, joy and grief, to your petty loves and hatreds, to wrath and
passion, to your attachment to success and things pleasant and to the sorrow
and suffering of failure and of things unpleasant. Desire brings always
confusion of mind and limitation of the will, an egoistic and distorted view of
things, a failure and clouding of knowledge. Desire and its preferences and
violences are the first strong root of sin and error. There can be while you
cherish desire no assured stainless tranquillity, no settled light, no calm pure
knowledge. There can be no right being—for desire is a perversion of the
spirit—and no firm foundation for right thought, action and feeling. Desire, if
permitted to remain under whatever colour, is a perpetual menace even to the
wisest and can at any moment subtly or violently cast
Page 582

down the mind from even its firmest and most surely acquired foundation.
Desire is the chief enemy of spiritual perfection.
\par “Slay then desire; put away attachment to the possession and enjoyment
of the outwardness of things. Separate yourself from all that comes to you as
outward touches and solicitations, as objects of the mind and senses. Learn to
bear and reject all the rush of the passions and to remain securely seated in
your inner self even while they rage in your members, until at last they cease
to affect any part of your nature. Bear and put away similarly the forceful
attacks and even the slightest insinuating touches of joy and sorrow. Cast
away liking and disliking, destroy preference and hatred, root out shrinking
and repugnance. Let there be a calm indifference to these things and to all
the objects of desire in all your nature. Look on them with the silent and
tranquil regard of an impersonal spirit.
\par “The result will be an absolute equality and the power of unshakable
calm that the universal spirit maintains in front of its creations, facing ever the
manifold action of Nature. Look with equal eyes; receive with an equal heart
and mind all that comes to you, success and failure, honour and dishonour, the
esteem and love of men and their scorn and persecution and hatred, every
happening that would be to others a cause of joy and every happening that
would be to others a cause of sorrow. Look with equal eyes on all persons,
on the good and the wicked, on the wise and the foolish, on the Brahmin and
the outcaste, on man at his highest and every pettiest creature. Meet equally
all men whatever their relations to you, friend and ally, neutral and indifferent,
opponent and enemy, lover and hater. These things touch the ego and you are
called to be free from ego. These are personal relations and you have to
observe all with the deep regard of the impersonal spirit. These are temporal
and personal differences which you have to see but not be influenced by
them; for you must fix not on these differences but on that which is the same
in all, on the one self which all are, on the Divine in every creature and on the
one working of Nature which is the equal will of God in men and things and
energies and happenings and in all endeavour and
Page 583

result and whatever outcome of the world's labour.
\par “Action will still be done in you because Nature is always at work; but
you must learn and feel that your self is not the doer of the action. Observe
simply, observe unmoved the working of Nature and the play of her qualities
and the magic of the gunas. Observe unmoved this action in yourself; look on
all that is being done around you and see that it is the same working in others.
Observe that the result of your works and theirs is constantly other than you
or they desired or intended, not theirs, not yours, but omnipotently fixed by a
greater Power that wills and acts here in universal Nature. Observe too that
even the will in your works is not yours but Nature's. It is the will of the ego
sense in you and is determined by the predominant quality in your composition
which she has developed in the past or else brings forward at the moment. It
depends on the play of your natural personality and that formation of Nature
is not your true person. Draw back from this external formation to your inner
silent self; you will see that you the Purusha are inactive, but Nature
continues to do always her works according to her gunas. Fix yourself in this
inner inactivity and stillness: no longer regard yourself as the doer. Remain
seated in yourself above the play, free from the perturbed action of the
gunas. Live secure in the purity of an impersonal spirit, live untroubled by the
mortal waves that persist in your members.
\par “If you can do this, then you will find yourself uplifted into a great
release, a wide freedom and a deep peace. Then you will be aware of God
and immortal, possessed of your dateless self-existence, independent of mind
and life and body, sure of your spiritual being, untouched by the reactions of
Nature, unstained by passion and sin and pain and sorrow. Then you will
depend for your joy and desire on no mortal or outward or worldly thing, but
will possess inalienably the self-sufficient delight of a calm and eternal spirit.
Then you will have ceased to be a mental creature and will have become
spirit illimitable, the Brahman. And into this eternity of the silent self, rejecting
from your mind all seed of thought and all root of desire, rejecting the figure
of birth in the body, you can pass at your end by concentration in the
Page 584

pure Eternal and a mighty transference of your consciousness to the Infinite,
the Absolute.
\par
\tstar
\par “This however is not all the truth of the Yoga and this end and way of
departure, though a great end and a great way, is not the thing I propose to
you. For I am the eternal Worker within you and I ask of you works. I
demand of you not a passive consent to a mechanical movement of Nature
from which in your self you are wholly separated, indifferent and aloof, but
action complete and divine, done as the willing and understanding instrument
of the Divine, done for God in you and others and for the good of the world.
This action I propose to you, first no doubt as a means of perfection in the
supreme spiritual Nature, but as a part too of that perfection. Action is a part
of the integral knowledge of God, of his greater mysterious truth and of an
entire living in the Divine; action can and should be continued even after
perfection and freedom are won. I ask of you the action of the Jivanmukta,
the works of the Siddha. Something has to be added to the Yoga already
described,—for that was only a first Yoga of knowledge. There is also a
Yoga of action in the illumination of God-experience; works can be made one
spirit with knowledge. For works done in a total self-vision and God-vision, a
vision of God in the world and of the world in God are themselves a
movement of knowledge, a movement of light, an indispensable means and an
intimate part of spiritual perfection.
\par “Therefore now to the experience of a high impersonality add too this
knowledge that the Supreme whom one meets as the pure silent Self can be
met also as a vast dynamic Spirit who originates all works and is Lord of the
worlds and the Master of man's action and endeavour and sacrifice. This
apparently self-acting mechanism of Nature conceals an immanent divine
Will that compels and guides it and shapes its purposes. But you cannot feel
or know that Will while you are shut up in your narrow cell of personality,
Page 585

blinded and chained to your viewpoint of the ego and its desires. For you can
wholly respond to it only when you are impersonalised by knowledge and
widened to see all things in the self and in God and the self and God in all
things. All becomes here by the power of the Spirit; all do their works by the
immanence of God in things and his presence in the heart of every creature.
The Creator of the worlds is not limited by his creations; the Lord of works is
not bound by his works; the divine Will is not attached to its labour and the
results of its labour: for it is omnipotent, all-possessing and all-blissful. But still
the Lord looks down on his creations from his transcendence; he descends as
the Avatar; he is here in you; he rules from within all things in the steps of
their nature. And you too must do works in him, after the way and in the
steps of the divine nature, untouched by limitation, attachment or bondage.
Act for the best good of all, act for the maintenance of the march of the
world, for the support or the leading of its peoples. The action asked of you is
the action of the liberated Yogin; it is the spontaneous output of a free and
God-held energy, it is an equal-minded movement, it is a selfless and
desireless labour.
\par “The first step on this free, this equal, this divine way of action is to put
from you attachment to fruit and recompense and to labour only for the sake
of the work itself that has to be done. For you must deeply feel that the fruits
belong not to you but to the Master of the world. Consecrate your labour and
leave its returns to the Spirit who manifests and fulfils himself in the universal
movement. The outcome of your action is determined by his will alone and
whatever it be, good or evil fortune, success or failure, it is turned by him to
the accomplishment of his world purpose. An entirely desireless and
disinterested working of the personal will and the whole instrumental nature is
the first rule of Karmayoga. Demand no fruit, accept whatever result is given
to you; accept it with equality and a calm gladness: successful or foiled,
prosperous or afflicted, continue unafraid, untroubled and unwavering on the
steep path of the divine action.
\par “This is no more than the first step on the path. For you must be not only
unattached to results, but unattached also to
Page 586

your labour. Cease to regard your works as your own; as you have
abandoned the fruits of your work, so you must surrender the work also to
the Lord of action and sacrifice. Recognise that your nature determines your
action; your nature rules the immediate motion of your Swabhava and
decides the expressive turn and development of your spirit in the paths of the
executive force of Prakriti. Bring in no longer any self-will to confuse the
steps of your mind in following the Godward way. Accept the action proper
to your nature. Make of all you do from the greatest and most unusual effort
to the smallest daily act, make of each act of your mind, each act of your
heart, each act of your body, of every inner and outer turn, of every thought
and will and feeling, of every step and pause and movement, a sacrifice to
the Master of all sacrifice and Tapasya.
\par “Next know that you are an eternal portion of the Eternal and the
powers of your nature are nothing without him, nothing if not his partial
self-expression. It is the Divine Infinite that is being progressively fulfilled in
your nature. It is the supreme power-to-be, it is the Shakti of the Lord that
shapes and takes shape in your swabhava. Give up then all sense that you
are the doer; see the Eternal alone as the doer of the action. Let your natural
being be an occasion, an instrument, a channel of power, a means of
manifestation. Offer up your will to him and make it one with his eternal will:
surrender all your actions in the silence of your self and spirit to the
transcendent Master of your nature. This cannot be really done or done
perfectly so long as there is any ego sense in you or any mental claim or vital
clamour. Action done in the least degree for the sake of the ego or tinged
with the desire and will of the ego is not a perfect sacrifice. Nor can this
great thing be well and truly done so long as there is inequality anywhere or
any stamp of ignorant shrinking and preference. But when there is a perfect
equality to all works, results, things and persons, a surrender to the Highest
and not to desire or ego, then the divine Will determines without stumbling or
deflection and the divine Power executes freely without any nether
interference or perverting reaction all works in the purity and safety of your
transmuted nature. To allow
Page 587

your every act to be shaped through you by the divine Will in its immaculate
sovereignty is the highest degree of the perfection that comes by doing works
in Yoga. That done, your nature will follow its cosmic walk in a complete and
constant union with the Supreme, express the highest Self, obey the Ishwara.
\par “This way of divine works is a far better release and a more perfect
way and solution than the physical renunciation of life and works. A physical
abstention is not entirely possible and is not in the measure of its possibility
indispensable to the spirit's freedom; it is besides a dangerous example, for it
exerts a misleading influence on ordinary men. The best, the greatest set the
standard which the rest of humanity strive to follow. Then since action is the
nature of the embodied spirit, since works are the will of the eternal Worker,
the great spirits, the master minds should set this example. World-workers
should they be, doing all works of the world without reservation, God-workers
free, glad and desireless, liberated souls and natures.
\par
\tstar
\par “The mind of knowledge and the will of action are not all; there is within
you a heart whose demand is for delight. Here too in the heart's power and
illumination, in its demand for delight, for the soul's satisfaction your nature
must be turned, transformed and lifted to one conscious ecstasy with the
Divine. The knowledge of the impersonal self brings its own Ananda; there is
a joy of impersonality, a singleness of joy of the pure spirit. But an integral
knowledge brings a greater triple delight. It opens the gates of the
Transcendent's bliss; it releases into the limitless delight of a universal
impersonality; it discovers the rapture of all this multitudinous manifestation:
for there is a joy of the Eternal in Nature. This Ananda in the Jiva, a portion
here of the Divine, takes the form of an ecstasy founded in the Godhead who
is his source, in his supreme self, in the Master of his existence. An entire
God-love and adoration extends to a love of the world and all its forms and
powers and creatures; in
Page 588

all the Divine is seen, is found, is adored, is served or is felt in oneness. Add
to knowledge and works this crown of the eternal triune delight; admit this
love, learn this worship; make it one spirit with works and knowledge. That is
the apex of the perfect perfection.
\par “This Yoga of love will give you a highest potential force for spiritual
largeness and unity and freedom. But it must be a love which is one with
God-knowledge. There is a devotion which seeks God in suffering for
consolation and succour and deliverance; there is a devotion which seeks him
for his gifts, for divine aid and protection and as a fountain of the satisfaction
of desire; there is a devotion that, still ignorant, turns to him for light and
knowledge. And so long as one is limited to these forms, there may persist
even in their highest and noblest Godward turn a working of the three gunas.
But when the God-lover is also the God-knower, the lover becomes one self
with the Beloved; for he is the chosen of the Most High and the elect of the
Spirit. Develop in yourself this God-engrossed love; the heart spiritualised and
lifted beyond the limitations of its lower nature will reveal to you most
intimately the secrets of God's immeasurable being, bring into you the whole
touch and influx and glory of his divine Power and open to you the mysteries
of an eternal rapture. It is perfect love that is the key to a perfect knowledge.
\par “This integral God-love demands too an integral work for the sake of the
Divine in yourself and in all creatures. The ordinary man does works in
obedience to some desire sinful or virtuous, some vital impulse low or high,
some mental choice common or exalted or from some mixed mind and life
motive. But the work done by you must be free and desireless; work done
without desire creates no reaction and imposes no bondage. Done in a
perfect equality and an unmoved calm and peace, but without any divine
passion, it is at first the fine yoke of a spiritual obligation, \s{kartavya\.m
karma}, then the uplifting of a divine sacrifice; at its highest it can be the
expression of a calm and glad acquiescence in active oneness. The oneness
in love will do much more: it will replace the first impassive calm by a strong
Page 589

and deep rapture, not the petty ardour of egoistic desire but the ocean of an
infinite Ananda. It will bring the moving sense and the pure and divine
passion of the presence of the Beloved into your works; there will be an
insistent joy of labour for God in yourself and for God in all beings. Love is
the crown of works and the crown of knowledge.
\par “This love that is knowledge, this love that can be the deep heart of your
action, will be your most effective force for an utter consecration and
complete perfection. An integral union of the individual's being with the
Divine Being is the condition of a perfect spiritual life. Turn then altogether
towards the Divine; make one with him by knowledge, love and works all
your nature. Turn utterly towards him and give up ungrudgingly into his hands
your mind and your heart and your will, all your consciousness and even your
very senses and body. Let your consciousness be sovereignly moulded by
him into a flawless mould of his divine consciousness. Let your heart become
a lucid or flaming heart of the Divine. Let your will be an impeccable action
of his will. Let your very sense and body be the rapturous sensation and body
of the Divine. Adore and sacrifice to him with all you are; remember him in
every thought and feeling, every impulsion and act. Persevere until all these
things are wholly his and he has taken up even in most common and outward
things as in the inmost sacred chamber of your spirit his constant transmuting
presence.
\par
\tstar
\par “This triune way is the means by which you can rise entirely out of your
lower into your supreme spiritual nature. That is the hidden superconscient
nature in which the Jiva, a portion of the high Infinite and Divine and
intimately one in law of being with him, dwells in his Truth and not any longer
in an externalised Maya. This perfection, this unity can be enjoyed in its own
native status, aloof in a supreme supracosmic existence: but here also you
may and should realise it, here in the human body and
Page 590

physical world. It is not enough for this end to be calm, inactive and free from
the gunas in the inner self and to watch and allow indifferently their
mechanical action in the outer members. For the active nature as well as the
self has to be given to the Divine and to become divine. All that you are must
grow into one law of being with the Purushottama, \s{s\=adharmya}; all must
be changed into my conscious spiritual becoming, \s{mad-bh\=ava}. A
completest surrender must be there. Take refuge with Me in all the many
ways and along all the living lines of your nature; for that alone will bring
about this great change and perfection.
\par “This high consummation of the Yoga will at once solve or rather it will
wholly remove and destroy at its roots the problem of action. Human action is
a thing full of difficulties and perplexities, tangled and confused like a forest
with a few more or less obscure paths cut into it rather than through it; but all
this difficulty and entanglement arises from the single fact that man lives
imprisoned in the ignorance of his mental, vital and physical nature. He is
compelled by its qualities and yet afflicted with responsibility in his will
because something in him feels that he is a soul who ought to be what now
he is not at all or very little, master and ruler of his nature. All his laws of
living, all his dharmas must be under these conditions imperfect, temporary
and provisional and at best only partly right or true. His imperfections can
cease only when he knows himself, knows the real nature of the world in
which he lives and, most of all, knows the Eternal from whom he comes and
in whom and by whom he exists. When he has once achieved a true
consciousness and knowledge, there is no longer any problem; for then he
acts freely out of himself and lives spontaneously in accordance with the
truth of his spirit and his highest nature. At its fullest, at the highest height of
this knowledge it is not he who acts but the Divine, the One eternal and
infinite who acts in him and through him in his liberated wisdom and power
and perfection.
\par “Man in his natural being is a sattwic, rajasic and tamasic creature of
Nature. According as one or other of her qualities predominates in him, he
makes and follows this or that law
Page 591

of his life and action. His tamasic, material, sensational mind subject to inertia
and fear and ignorance either obeys partly the compulsion of its environment
and partly the spasmodic impulses of its desires or finds a protection in the
routine following of a dull customary intelligence. The rajasic mind of desire
struggles with the world in which it lives and tries to possess always new
things, to command, battle, conquer, create, destroy, accumulate. Always it
goes forward tossed between success and failure, joy and sorrow, exultation
or despair. But in all, whatever law it may seem to admit, it follows really
only the law of the lower self and ego, the restless, untired, self-devouring
and all-devouring mind of the Asuric and Rakshasic nature. The sattwic
intelligence surmounts partly this state, sees that a better law than that of
desire and ego must be followed and erects and imposes on itself a social, an
ethical, a religious rule, a Dharma, a Shastra. This is as high as the ordinary
mind of man can go, to erect an ideal or practical rule for the guidance of the
mind and will and as faithfully as possible observe it in life and conduct. This
sattwic mind must be developed to its highest point where it succeeds in
putting away the mixture of ego motive altogether and observes the Dharma
for its own sake as an impersonal social, ethical or religious ideal, the thing
disinterestedly to be done solely because it is right, \s{kartavya\.m karma}.
\par “The real truth of all this action of Prakriti is, however, less outwardly
mental and more inwardly subjective. It is this that man is an embodied soul
involved in material and mental nature, and he follows in it a progressive law
of his development determined by an inner law of his being; his cast of spirit
makes out his cast of mind and life, his swabhava. Each man has a
swadharma, a law of his inner being which he must observe, find out and
follow. The action determined by his inner nature, that is his real Dharma. To
follow it is the true law of his development; to deviate from it is to bring in
confusion, retardation and error. That social, ethical, religious or other law
and ideal is best for him always which helps him to observe and follow out his
Swadharma.
\par “All this action however is even at its best subject to the
Page 592

ignorance of the mind and the play of the gunas. It is only when the soul of
man finds itself that he can overpass and erase from his consciousness the
ignorance and the confusion of the gunas. It is true that even when you have
found yourself and live in your self, your nature will still continue on its old
lines and act for a time according to its inferior modes. But now you can
follow that action with a perfect self-knowledge and can make of it a
sacrifice to the Master of your existence. Follow then the law of your
Swadharma, do the action that is demanded by your Swabhava whatever it
may be. Reject all motive of egoism, all initiation by self-will, all rule of desire,
until you can make the complete surrender of all the ways of your being to
the Supreme.
\par “And when you are once able to do that sincerely, that will be the
moment to renounce the initiation of your acts without exception into the
hands of the supreme Godhead within you. Then you will be released from all
laws of conduct, liberated from all dharmas. The Divine Power and Presence
within you will free you from sin and evil and lift you far above human
standards of virtue. For you will live and act in the absolute and spontaneous
right and purity of the spiritual being and the immaculate force of the divine
nature. The Divine and not you will enact his own will and works through
you, not for your lower personal pleasure and desire, but for the
world-purpose and for your divine good and the manifest or secret good of
all. Inundated with light, you will see the form of the Godhead in the world
and in the works of Time, know his purpose and hear his command. Your
nature will receive as an instrument his will only whatever it may be and do it
without question, because there will come with each initiation of your acts
from above and within you an imperative knowledge and an illumined assent
to the divine wisdom and its significance. The battle will be his, his the
victory, his the empire.
\par “This will be your perfection in the world and the body, and beyond these
worlds of temporal birth the supreme eternal superconsciousness will be
yours and you will dwell for ever in the highest status of the Supreme Spirit.
The cycles of incarnation and the fear of mortality will not distress you; for
here in life
Page 593

you will have accomplished the expression of the Godhead, and your soul,
even though it has descended into mind and body, will already be living in the
vast eternity of the Spirit.
\par “This then is the supreme movement, this complete surrender of your
whole self and nature, this abandonment of all dharmas to the Divine who is
your highest Self, this absolute aspiration of all your members to the supreme
spiritual nature. If you can once achieve it, whether at the outset or much
later on the way, then whatever you are or were in your outward nature, your
way is sure and your perfection inevitable. A supreme Presence within you
will take up your Yoga and carry it swiftly along the lines of your swabhava
to its consummate completion. And afterwards whatever your way of life
and mode of action, you will be consciously living, acting and moving in him
and the Divine Power will act through you in your every inner and outer
motion. This is the supreme way because it is the highest secret and mystery
and yet an inner movement progressively realisable by all. This is the deepest
and most intimate truth of your real, your spiritual existence.”
\par
\center\ftextb THE END
\par
Page 594

\fsqstart

\preface
\par
\ht Note on the Text
\par\nodrop ESSAYS ON THE GITA was first published in the monthly
review {\it Arya} in two series. The first series, covering the first six
chapters of the Gita, ran from August 1916 to July 1918. The second series,
covering the last twelve chapters, ran from August 1918 to July 1920.
\par The first series, slightly revised and with some new chapter titles, was
brought out as a book in 1922 by V. Ramaswamy Sastrulu and Sons, Madras.
New editions of the first series were published by Arya Publishing House,
Calcutta, in 1926, 1937, 1944 and 1949. The same publisher issued an
extensively revised edition of the second series in 1928, and new editions of
this series in 1942, 1945 and 1949.
\par The 1922 edition of the first series may be considered an incomplete first
edition of {\it Essays on the Gita}. The first and second series pairs of 1926
and 1928, 1937 and 1942, 1944 and 1945, and 1949 (both series) may be
considered the second, third, fourth and fifth editions of the book.
\par Since 1949 the two series of {\it Essays on the Gita} have appeared in
one volume. An American edition was published by The Sri Aurobindo
Library, New York, in 1950. The sixth and seventh Indian editions were
published by the Sri Aurobindo International Centre of Education in 1959 and
1966.
\par In 1970 {\it Essays on the Gita} was published as volume 13 of the Sri
Aurobindo Birth Centenary Library. This, the eighth Indian edition, was
reprinted many times.
\par In 1997 {\it Essays on the Gita} was issued as volume 19 of The
Complete Works of Sri Aurobindo. The text of this edition was carefully
checked against Sri Aurobindo's extant manuscripts and all editions published
before 1950.
\par The text of the present, electronic, edition (1999) is identical to the text
of the CWSA edition. For the convenience of those who use the SABCL
edition, SABCL page numbers are provided as well as the CWSA page
numbers.
\par\fsqend
