\set
\title The Renaissance in India
\author Sri Aurobindo

\preface
\par
\ht Publisher's Note
\par\nodrop Most of the essays that make up this volume have appeared until
now under the title {\it The Foundations of Indian Culture}. That title was not
Sri Aurobindo's. It was first used when those essays were published as a
book in New York in 1953.
\par The present volume consists of three series of essays and one single
essay, published in the monthly review {\it Arya} as follows:
\par
\PI{\it The Renaissance in India}, August–November 1918.
\par{\it Indian Culture and External Influence}, March 1919.
\par{\it “Is India Civilised?”}, December 1918–February 1919.
\par{\it A Defence of Indian Culture}, February 1919–January 1921.
\par
\PF Sri Aurobindo revised the four essays making up {\it The Renaissance in
India} and published them as a booklet in 1920. He later revised {\it “Is India
Civilised?”} and the first eight and a half chapters of {\it A Defence of
Indian Culture}. These revised chapters were not published during his
lifetime. In 1947 some of the later chapters of {\it A Defence of Indian
Culture}, lightly revised, were published in two booklets. The four essays on
Indian art appeared as {\it The Significance of Indian Art} and the four
essays on Indian polity as {\it The Spirit and Form of Indian Polity}. The rest
of the series was only sporadically revised. When its publication was
proposed to him in 1949, Sri Aurobindo replied:
\par
\BF The Defence of Indian Culture is an unfinished book and also I had
intended to alter much of it and to omit all but brief references to William
Archer's criticisms. That was why its publication has been so long delayed.
Even if it is reprinted as it is considerable alterations will have to be made and
there must be some completion and an end to the book which does not at
present exist.
\par
\PF The desired alterations were never made.
\par
\PF{\it The Foundations of Indian Culture} and {\it The Renaissance in
India} were published together in 1971 as volume 14 of the Sri Aurobindo
Birth Centenary Library. The SABCL edition of {\it The Foundations},
without {\it The Renaissance, }was reprinted several times between 1980
and 1995.
\par In 1998 the same writings were brought out, in a different order, as
volume 20 of The Complete Works of Sri Aurobindo under the title {\it The
\NH Renaissance in India with A Defence of Indian Culture}. The text was
carefully checked against the {\it Arya} and, where appropriate, against the
revised versions.
\par The text of the present, electronic, edition (1999) is identical to the text
of the CWSA edition. For the convenience of those who use the SABCL
edition, SABCL page numbers are provided as well as the CWSA page
numbers.
\par The PDF file of this book (rii.pdf) contains a number of photographic
reproductions of Indian architecture, sculpture and painting to illustrate
references in the text.

\book
\par
\ht The Renaissance in India

\section
\par
Page --

\ht The Renaissance in India
\par\drop There has been recently some talk of a Renaissance in India. A
number of illuminating essays with that general title and subject have been
given to us by a poet and subtle critic and thinker, Mr. James H. Cousins, and
others have touched suggestively various sides of the growing movement
towards a new life and a new thought that may well seem to justify the
description. This Renaissance, this new birth in India, if it is a fact, must
become a thing of immense importance both to herself and the world, to
herself because of all that is meant for her in the recovery or the change of
her time-old spirit and national ideals, to the world because of the possibilities
involved in the rearising of a force that is in many respects unlike any other
and its genius very different from the mentality and spirit that have hitherto
governed the modern idea in mankind, although not so far away perhaps from
that which is preparing to govern the future. It is rather the first point of view
that I shall put forward at present: for the question what India means to make
of her own life must precede the wider question what her new life may mean
to the human race. And it is besides likely to become before long an issue of
a pressing importance.
\par There is a first question, whether at all there is really a Renaissance in
India. That depends a good deal on what we mean by the word; it depends
also on the future, for the thing itself is only in its infancy and it is too early to
say to what it may lead. The word carries the mind back to the turning-point
of European culture to which it was first applied; that was not so much a
reawakening as an overturn and reversal, a seizure of Christianised,
Teutonised, feudalised Europe by the old Graeco-Latin spirit and form with all
the complex and momentous results which came from it. That is certainly not
a type of renaissance that is at all possible in India. There is
Page 3

a closer resemblance to the recent Celtic movement in Ireland, the attempt of
a reawakened national spirit to find a new impulse of self-expression which
shall give the spiritual force for a great reshaping and rebuilding: in Ireland
this was discovered by a return to the Celtic spirit and culture after a long
period of eclipsing English influences, and in India something of the same kind
of movement is appearing and has especially taken a pronounced turn since
the political outburst of 1905. But even here the analogy does not give the
whole truth.
\par We have to see moreover that the whole is at present a great formless
chaos of conflicting influences with a few luminous points of formation here
and there where a new self-consciousness has come to the surface. But it
cannot be said that these forms have yet a sufficient hold on the general mind
of the people. They represent an advance movement; they are the voices of
the vanguard, the torchlights of the pioneers. On the whole what we see is a
giant Shakti who awakening into a new world, a new and alien environment,
finds herself shackled in all her limbs by a multitude of gross or minute bonds,
bonds self-woven by her past, bonds recently imposed from outside, and is
struggling to be free from them, to arise and proclaim herself, to cast abroad
her spirit and set her seal on the world. We hear on every side a sound of the
slow fraying of bonds, here and there a sharp tearing and snapping; but
freedom of movement has not yet been attained. The eyes are not yet clear,
the bud of the soul has only partly opened. The Titaness has not yet arisen.
\par Mr. Cousins puts the question in his book whether the word renaissance
at all applies since India has always been awake and stood in no need of
reawakening. There is a certain truth behind that and to one coming in with a
fresh mind from outside and struck by the living continuity of past and present
India, it may be especially apparent; but that is not quite how we can see it
who are her children and are still suffering from the bitter effects of the great
decline which came to a head in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.
Undoubtedly there was a period, a brief but very disastrous period of the
dwindling of that great fire of life, even a moment of incipient disintegration,
marked politically by
Page 4

the anarchy which gave European adventure its chance, inwardly by an
increasing torpor of the creative spirit in religion and art,—science and
philosophy and intellectual knowledge had long been dead or petrified into a
mere scholastic Punditism,—all pointing to a nadir of setting energy, the
evening-time from which according to the Indian idea of the cycles a new
age has to start. It was that moment and the pressure of a superimposed
European culture which followed it that made the reawakening necessary.
\par We have practically to take three facts into consideration, the great past
of Indian culture and life with the moment of inadaptive torpor into which it
had lapsed, the first period of the Western contact in which it seemed for a
moment likely to perish by slow decomposition, and the ascending movement
which first broke into some clarity of expression only a decade or two ago.
Mr. Cousins has his eye fixed on Indian spirituality which has always
maintained itself even in the decline of the national vitality; it was certainly
that which saved India always at every critical moment of her destiny, and it
has been the starting-point too of her renascence. Any other nation under the
same pressure would have long ago perished soul and body. But certainly the
outward members were becoming gangrened; the powers of renovation
seemed for a moment to be beaten by the powers of stagnation, and
stagnation is death. Now that the salvation, the reawakening has come, India
will certainly keep her essential spirit, will keep her characteristic soul, but
there is likely to be a great change of the body. The shaping for itself of a
new body, of new philosophical, artistic, literary, cultural, political, social
forms by the same soul rejuvenescent will, I should think, be the type of the
Indian renascence,—forms not contradictory of the truths of life which the
old expressed, but rather expressive of those truths restated, cured of defect,
completed.
\par What was this ancient spirit and characteristic soul of India? European
writers, struck by the general metaphysical bent of the Indian mind, by its
strong religious instincts and religious idealism, by its other-worldliness, are
inclined to write as if this
Page 5

were all the Indian spirit. An abstract, metaphysical, religious mind
overpowered by the sense of the infinite, not apt for life, dreamy, unpractical,
turning away from life and action as Maya, this, they said, is India; and for a
time Indians in this as in other matters submissively echoed their new
Western teachers and masters. They learned to speak with pride of their
metaphysics, of their literature, of their religion, but in all else they were
content to be learners and imitators. Since then Europe has discovered that
there was too an Indian art of remarkable power and beauty; but the rest of
what India meant it has hardly at all seen. But meanwhile the Indian mind
began to emancipate itself and to look upon its past with a clear and
self-discerning eye, and it very soon discovered that it had been misled into
an entirely false self-view. All such one-sided appreciations indeed almost
invariably turn out to be false. Was it not the general misconception about
Germany at one time, because she was great in philosophy and music, but
had blundered in life and been unable to make the most of its materials, that
this was a nation of unpractical dreamers, idealists, erudites and
sentimentalists, patient, docile and industrious certainly, but politically
inapt,—“admirable, ridiculous Germany”? Europe has had a terrible
awakening from that error. When the renascence of India is complete, she
will have an awakening, not of the same brutal kind, certainly, but startling
enough, as to the real nature and capacity of the Indian spirit.
\par Spirituality is indeed the master-key of the Indian mind; the sense of the
infinite is native to it. India saw from the beginning,—and, even in her ages of
reason and her age of increasing ignorance, she never lost hold of the
insight,—that life cannot be rightly seen in the sole light, cannot be perfectly
lived in the sole power of its externalities. She was alive to the greatness of
material laws and forces; she had a keen eye for the importance of the
physical sciences; she knew how to organise the arts of ordinary life. But she
saw that the physical does not get its full sense until it stands in right relation
to the supra-physical; she saw that the complexity of the universe could not
be explained in the present terms of man or seen by his superficial sight, that
Page 6

there were other powers behind, other powers within man himself of which
he is normally unaware, that he is conscious only of a small part of himself,
that the invisible always surrounds the visible, the suprasensible the sensible,
even as infinity always surrounds the finite. She saw too that man has the
power of exceeding himself, of becoming himself more entirely and
profoundly than he is,—truths which have only recently begun to be seen in
Europe and seem even now too great for its common intelligence. She saw
the myriad gods beyond man, God beyond the gods, and beyond God his own
ineffable eternity; she saw that there were ranges of life beyond our life,
ranges of mind beyond our present mind and above these she saw the
splendours of the spirit. Then with that calm audacity of her intuition which
knew no fear or littleness and shrank from no act whether of spiritual or
intellectual, ethical or vital courage, she declared that there was none of these
things which man could not attain if he trained his will and knowledge; he
could conquer these ranges of mind, become the spirit, become a god,
become one with God, become the ineffable Brahman. And with the logical
practicality and sense of science and organised method which distinguished
her mentality, she set forth immediately to find out the way. Hence from long
ages of this insight and practice there was ingrained in her her spirituality, her
powerful psychic tendency, her great yearning to grapple with the infinite and
possess it, her ineradicable religious sense, her idealism, her Yoga, the
constant turn of her art and her philosophy.
\par But this was not and could not be her whole mentality, her entire spirit;
spirituality itself does not flourish on earth in the void, even as our
mountaintops do not rise like those of an enchantment of dream out of the
clouds without a base. When we look at the past of India, what strikes us
next is her stupendous vitality, her inexhaustible power of life and joy of life,
her almost unimaginably prolific creativeness. For three thousand years at
least,—it is indeed much longer,—she has been creating abundantly and
incessantly, lavishly, with an inexhaustible many-sidedness, republics and
kingdoms and empires, philosophies and cosmogonies and sciences and
creeds and arts and poems
Page 7

and all kinds of monuments, palaces and temples and public works,
communities and societies and religious orders, laws and codes and rituals,
physical sciences, psychic sciences, systems of Yoga, systems of politics and
administration, arts spiritual, arts worldly, trades, industries, fine crafts,—the
list is endless and in each item there is almost a plethora of activity. She
creates and creates and is not satisfied and is not tired; she will not have an
end of it, seems hardly to need a space for rest, a time for inertia and lying
fallow. She expands too outside her borders; her ships cross the ocean and
the fine superfluity of her wealth brims over to Judaea and Egypt and Rome;
her colonies spread her arts and epics and creeds in the Archipelago; her
traces are found in the sands of Mesopotamia; her religions conquer China
and Japan and spread westward as far as Palestine and Alexandria, and the
figures of the Upanishads and the sayings of the Buddhists are reechoed on
the lips of Christ. Everywhere, as on her soil, so in her works there is the
teeming of a superabundant energy of life. European critics complain that in
her ancient architecture, sculpture and art there is no reticence, no holding
back of riches, no blank spaces, that she labours to fill every rift with ore,
occupy every inch with plenty. Well, but defect or no, that is the necessity of
her superabundance of life, of the teeming of the infinite within her. She
lavishes her riches because she must, as the Infinite fills every inch of space
with the stirring of life and energy because it is the Infinite.
\par But this supreme spirituality and this prolific abundance of the energy
and joy of life and creation do not make all that the spirit of India has been in
its past. It is not a confused splendour of tropical vegetation under heavens of
a pure sapphire infinity. It is only to eyes unaccustomed to such wealth that
there seems to be a confusion in this crowding of space with rich forms of
life, a luxurious disorder of excess or a wanton lack of measure, clear
balance and design. For the third power of the ancient Indian spirit was a
strong intellectuality, at once austere and rich, robust and minute, powerful
and delicate, massive in principle and curious in detail. Its chief impulse was
that of order and arrangement, but an order founded upon a seeking for the
inner
Page 8

law and truth of things and having in view always the possibility of
conscientious practice. India has been preeminently the land of the Dharma
and the Shastra. She searched for the inner truth and law of each human or
cosmic activity, its dharma; that found, she laboured to cast into elaborate
form and detailed law of arrangement its application in fact and rule of life.
Her first period was luminous with the discovery of the Spirit; her second
completed the discovery of the Dharma; her third elaborated into detail the
first simpler formulation of the Shastra; but none was exclusive, the three
elements are always present.
\par In this third period the curious elaboration of all life into a science and an
art assumes extraordinary proportions. The mere mass of the intellectual
production during the period from Asoka well into the Mahomedan epoch is
something truly prodigious, as can be seen at once if one studies the account
which recent scholarship gives of it, and we must remember that that
scholarship as yet only deals with a fraction of what is still lying extant and
what is extant is only a small percentage of what was once written and
known. There is no historical parallel for such an intellectual labour and
activity before the invention of printing and the facilities of modern science;
yet all that mass of research and production and curiosity of detail was
accomplished without these facilities and with no better record than the
memory and for an aid the perishable palm-leaf. Nor was all this colossal
literature confined to philosophy and theology, religion and Yoga, logic and
rhetoric and grammar and linguistics, poetry and drama, medicine and
astronomy and the sciences; it embraced all life, politics and society, all the
arts from painting to dancing, all the sixty-four accomplishments, everything
then known that could be useful to life or interesting to the mind, even, for
instance, to such practical side minutiae as the breeding and training of horses
and elephants, each of which had its Shastra and its art, its apparatus of
technical terms, its copious literature. In each subject from the largest and
most momentous to the smallest and most trivial there was expended the
same all-embracing, opulent, minute and thorough intellectuality. On one side
there is an insatiable curiosity, the desire of life to know
Page 9

itself in every detail, on the other a spirit of organisation and scrupulous order,
the desire of the mind to tread through life with a harmonised knowledge and
in the right rhythm and measure. Thus an ingrained and dominant spirituality,
an inexhaustible vital creativeness and gust of life and, mediating between
them, a powerful, penetrating and scrupulous intelligence combined of the
rational, ethical and aesthetic mind each at a high intensity of action, created
the harmony of the ancient Indian culture.
\par Indeed without this opulent vitality and opulent intellectuality India could
never have done so much as she did with her spiritual tendencies. It is a great
error to suppose that spirituality flourishes best in an impoverished soil with
the life half-killed and the intellect discouraged and intimidated. The
spirituality that so flourishes is something morbid, hectic and exposed to
perilous reactions. It is when the race has lived most richly and thought most
profoundly that spirituality finds its heights and its depths and its constant and
many-sided fruition. In modern Europe it is after a long explosion of vital
force and a stupendous activity of the intellect that spirituality has begun
really to emerge and with some promise of being not, as it once was, the
sorrowful physician of the malady of life, but the beginning of a large and
profound clarity. The European eye is struck in Indian spiritual thought by the
Buddhistic and illusionist denial of life. But it must be remembered that this is
only one side of its philosophic tendency which assumed exaggerated
proportions only in the period of decline. In itself too that was simply one
result, in one direction, of a tendency of the Indian mind which is common to
all its activities, the impulse to follow each motive, each specialisation of
motive even, spiritual, intellectual, ethical, vital, to its extreme point and to
sound its utmost possibility. Part of its innate direction was to seek in each
not only for its fullness of detail, but for its infinite, its absolute, its profoundest
depth or its highest pinnacle. It knew that without a “fine excess” we cannot
break down the limits which the dull temper of the normal mind opposes to
knowledge and thought and experience; and it had in seeking this point a
boundless courage and yet a sure tread. Thus it carried each tangent of
philosophic thought,
Page 10

each line of spiritual experience to its farthest point, and chose to look from
that farthest point at all existence, so as to see what truth or power such a
view could give it. It tried to know the whole of divine nature and to see too
as high as it could beyond nature and into whatever there might be of
supradivine. When it formulated a spiritual atheism, it followed that to its
acme of possible vision. When, too, it indulged in materialistic
atheism,—though it did that only with a side glance, as the freak of an
insatiable intellectual curiosity,—yet it formulated it straight out, boldly and
nakedly, without the least concession to idealism or ethicism.
\par Everywhere we find this tendency. The ideals of the Indian mind have
included the height of self-assertion of the human spirit and its thirst of
independence and mastery and possession and the height also of its
self-abnegation, dependence and submission and self-giving. In life the ideal
of opulent living and the ideal of poverty were carried to the extreme of regal
splendour and the extreme of satisfied nudity. Its intuitions were sufficiently
clear and courageous not to be blinded by its own most cherished ideas and
fixed habits of life. If it was obliged to stereotype caste as the symbol of its
social order, it never quite forgot, as the caste-spirit is apt to forget, that the
human soul and the human mind are beyond caste. For it had seen in the
lowest human being the Godhead, Narayana. It emphasised distinctions only
to turn upon them and deny all distinctions. If all its political needs and
circumstances compelled it at last to exaggerate the monarchical principle
and declare the divinity of the king and to abolish its earlier republican city
states and independent federations as too favourable to the centrifugal
tendency, if therefore it could not develop democracy, yet it had the
democratic idea, applied it in the village, in council and municipality, within the
caste, was the first to assert a divinity in the people and could cry to the
monarch at the height of his power, “O king, what art thou but the head
servant of the demos?” Its idea of the golden age was a free spiritual
anarchism. Its spiritual extremism could not prevent it from fathoming
through a long era the life of the senses and its enjoyments, and there too it
sought the utmost
Page 11

richness of sensuous detail and the depths and intensities of sensuous
experience. Yet it is notable that this pursuit of the most opposite extremes
never resulted in disorder; and its most hedonistic period offers nothing that at
all resembles the unbridled corruption which a similar tendency has more than
once produced in Europe. For the Indian mind is not only spiritual and ethical,
but intellectual and artistic, and both the rule of the intellect and the rhythm of
beauty are hostile to the spirit of chaos. In every extreme the Indian spirit
seeks for a law in that extreme and a rule, measure and structure in its
application. Besides, this sounding of extremes is balanced by a still more
ingrained characteristic, the synthetical tendency, so that having pushed each
motive to its farthest possibility the Indian mind returns always towards some
fusion of the knowledge it has gained and to a resulting harmony and balance
in action and institution. Balance and rhythm which the Greeks arrived at by
self-limitation, India arrived at by its sense of intellectual, ethical and aesthetic
order and the synthetic impulse of its mind and life.
\par I have dwelt on these facts because they are apt to be ignored by those
who look only at certain sides of the Indian mind and spirit which are most
prominent in the last epochs. By insisting only upon these we get an
inaccurate or incomplete idea of the past of India and of the integral meaning
of its civilisation and the spirit that animated it. The present is only a last
deposit of the past at a time of ebb; it has no doubt also to be the
starting-point of the future, but in this present all that was in India's past is still
dormant, it is not destroyed; it is waiting there to assume new forms. The
decline was the ebb-movement of a creative spirit which can only be
understood by seeing it in the full tide of its greatness; the renascence is the
return of the tide and it is the same spirit that is likely to animate it, although
the forms it takes may be quite new. To judge therefore the possibilities of
the renascence, the powers that it may reveal and the scope that it may take,
we must dismiss the idea that the tendency of metaphysical abstraction is the
one note of the Indian spirit which dominates or inspires all its cadences. Its
real
Page 12

key-note is the tendency of spiritual realisation, not cast at all into any white
monotone, but many-faceted, many-coloured, as supple in its adaptability as it
is intense in its highest pitches. The note of spirituality is dominant, initial,
constant, always recurrent; it is the support of all the rest. The first age of
India's greatness was a spiritual age when she sought passionately for the
truth of existence through the intuitive mind and through an inner experience
and interpretation both of the psychic and the physical existence. The stamp
put on her by that beginning she has never lost, but rather always enriched it
with fresh spiritual experience and discovery at each step of the national life.
Even in her hour of decline it was the one thing she could never lose.
\par But this spiritual tendency does not shoot upward only to the abstract,
the hidden and the intangible; it casts its rays downward and outward to
embrace the multiplicities of thought and the richness of life. Therefore the
second long epoch of India's greatness was an age of the intellect, the ethical
sense, the dynamic will in action enlightened to formulate and govern life in
the lustre of spiritual truth. After the age of the Spirit, the age of the Dharma;
after the Veda and Upanishads, the heroic centuries of action and social
formation, typal construction and thought and philosophy, when the outward
forms of Indian life and culture were fixed in their large lines and even their
later developments were being determined in the seed. The great classical
age of Sanskrit culture was the flowering of this intellectuality into curiosity
of detail in the refinements of scholarship, science, art, literature, politics,
sociology, mundane life. We see at this time too the sounding not only of
aesthetic, but of emotional and sensuous, even of vital and sensual
experience. But the old spirituality reigned behind all this mental and all this
vital activity, and its later period, the post-classical, saw a lifting up of the
whole lower life and an impressing upon it of the values of the spirit. This
was the sense of the Puranic and Tantric systems and the religions of Bhakti.
Later Vaishnavism, the last fine flower of the Indian spirit, was in its essence
the taking up of the aesthetic, emotional and sensuous being into the service
of the spiritual. It completed the curve of the cycle.
Page 13

\par The evening of decline which followed the completion of the curve was
prepared by three movements of retrogression. First there is, comparatively,
a sinking of that superabundant vital energy and a fading of the joy of life and
the joy of creation. Even in the decline this energy is still something splendid
and extraordinary and only for a very brief period sinks nearest to a complete
torpor; but still a comparison with its past greatness will show that the
decadence was marked and progressive. Secondly, there is a rapid cessation
of the old free intellectual activity, a slumber of the scientific and the critical
mind as well as the creative intuition; what remains becomes more and more
a repetition of ill-understood fragments of past knowledge. There is a
petrification of the mind and life in the relics of the forms which a great
intellectual past had created. Old authority and rule become rigidly despotic
and, as always then happens, lose their real sense and spirit. Finally,
spirituality remains but burns no longer with the large and clear flame of
knowledge of former times, but in intense jets and in a dispersed action which
replaces the old magnificent synthesis and in which certain spiritual truths are
emphasised to the neglect of others. This diminution amounts to a certain
failure of the great endeavour which is the whole meaning of Indian culture, a
falling short in the progress towards the perfect spiritualisation of the mind
and the life. The beginnings were superlative, the developments very great,
but at a certain point where progress, adaptation, a new flowering should
have come in, the old civilisation stopped short, partly drew back, partly lost
its way. The essential no doubt remained and still remains in the heart of the
race and not only in its habits and memories, but in its action it was covered
up in a great smoke of confusion. The causes internal and external we need
not now discuss; but the fact is there. It was the cause of the momentary
helplessness of the Indian mind in the face of new and unprecedented
conditions.
\par It was at this moment that the European wave swept over India. The
first effect of this entry of a new and quite opposite civilisation was the
destruction of much that had no longer the
Page 14

power to live, the deliquescence of much else, a tendency to the devitalisation
of the rest. A new activity came in, but this was at first crudely and
confusedly imitative of the foreign culture. It was a crucial moment and an
ordeal of perilous severity; a less vigorous energy of life might well have
foundered and perished under the double weight of the deadening of its old
innate motives and a servile imitation of alien ideas and habits. History shows
us how disastrous this situation can be to nations and civilisations. But
fortunately the energy of life was there, sleeping only for a moment, not dead,
and, given that energy, the evil carried within itself its own cure. For
whatever temporary rotting and destruction this crude impact of European
life and culture has caused, it gave three needed impulses. It revived the
dormant intellectual and critical impulse; it rehabilitated life and awakened the
desire of new creation; it put the reviving Indian spirit face to face with novel
conditions and ideals and the urgent necessity of understanding, assimilating
and conquering them. The national mind turned a new eye on its past culture,
reawoke to its sense and import, but also at the same time saw it in relation to
modern knowledge and ideas. Out of this awakening vision and impulse the
Indian renaissance is arising, and that must determine its future tendency.
The recovery of the old spiritual knowledge and experience in all its
splendour, depth and fullness is its first, most essential work; the flowing of
this spirituality into new forms of philosophy, literature, art, science and
critical knowledge is the second; an original dealing with modern problems in
the light of the Indian spirit and the endeavour to formulate a greater
synthesis of a spiritualised society is the third and most difficult. Its success
on these three lines will be the measure of its help to the future of humanity.
\par The Spirit is a higher infinite of verities; life is a lower infinite of
possibilities which seek to grow and find their own truth and fulfilment in the
light of these verities. Our intellect, our will, our ethical and our aesthetic
being are the reflectors and the mediators. The method of the West is to
exaggerate life and to call down as much—or as little—as may be of the
higher powers
Page 15

to stimulate and embellish life.
\note{Mr. Cousins' distinction between invocation and evocation.} But the
method of India is on the contrary to discover the spirit within and the higher
hidden intensities of the superior powers and to dominate life in one way or
another so as to make it responsive to and expressive of the spirit and in that
way increase the power of life. Its tendency with the intellect, will, ethical,
aesthetic and emotional being is to sound indeed their normal mental
possibilities, but also to upraise them towards the greater light and power of
their own highest intuitions. The work of the renaissance in India must be to
make this spirit, this higher view of life, this sense of deeper potentiality once
more a creative, perhaps a dominant power in the world. But to that truth of
itself it is as yet only vaguely awake; the mass of Indian action is still at the
moment proceeding under the impress of the European motive and method
and, because there is a spirit within us to which they are foreign, the action is
poor in will, feeble in form and ineffective in results, for it does not come
from the roots of our being. Only in a few directions is there some clear light
of self-knowledge. It is when a greater light prevails and becomes general
that we shall be able to speak, not only in prospect but in fact, of the
renaissance of India.
Page 16

\par
\ht The Renaissance in India–2
\par\drop The process which has led up to the renaissance now inevitable,
may be analysed, both historically and logically, into three steps by which a
transition is being managed, a complex breaking, reshaping and new building,
with the final result yet distant in prospect,—though here and there the first
bases may have been already laid,—a new age of an old culture transformed,
not an affiliation of a new-born civilisation to one that is old and dead, but a
true rebirth, a renascence. The first step was the reception of the European
contact, a radical reconsideration of many of the prominent elements and
some revolutionary denial of the very principles of the old culture. The
second was a reaction of the Indian spirit upon the European influence,
sometimes with a total denial of what it offered and a stressing both of the
essential and the strict letter of the national past, which yet masked a
movement of assimilation. The third, only now beginning or recently begun, is
rather a process of new creation in which the spiritual power of the Indian
mind remains supreme, recovers its truths, accepts whatever it finds sound or
true, useful or inevitable of the modern idea and form, but so transmutes and
Indianises it, so absorbs and so transforms it entirely into itself that its foreign
character disappears and it becomes another harmonious element in the
characteristic working of the ancient goddess, the Shakti of India mastering
and taking possession of the modern influence, no longer possessed or
overcome by it.
\par Nothing in the many processes of Nature, whether she deals with men
or with things, comes by chance or accident or is really at the mercy of
external causes. What things are inwardly, determines the course of even
their most considerable changes; and timeless India being what she is, the
complexity of this transition was predestined and unavoidable. It was
impossible that
Page 17

she should take a rapid wholesale imprint of Western motives and their forms
and leave the ruling motives of her own past to accommodate themselves to
the foreign change as best they could afterwards. A swift transformation
scene like that which brought into being a new modernised Japan, would have
been out of the question for her, even if the external circumstances had been
equally favourable. For Japan lives centrally in her temperament and in her
aesthetic sense, and therefore she has always been rapidly assimilative; her
strong temperamental persistence has been enough to preserve her national
stamp and her artistic vision a sufficient power to keep her soul alive. But
India lives centrally in the spirit, with less buoyancy and vivacity and
therefore with a less ready adaptiveness of creation, but a greater, intenser,
more brooding depth; her processes are apt to be deliberate, uncertain and
long because she has to take things into that depth and from its profoundest
inwardness to modify or remould the more outward parts of her life. And
until that has been done, the absorption completed, the powers of the
remoulding determined, she cannot yet move forward with an easier step on
the new way she is taking. From the complexity of the movement arises all
the difficulty of the problems she has to face and the rather chaotic confusion
of the opinions, standpoints and tendencies that have got entangled in the
process, which prevents any easy, clear and decided development, so that we
seem to be advancing under a confused pressure of circumstance or in a
series of shifting waves of impulsion, this ebbing for that to arise, rather than
with any clear idea of our future direction. But here too lies the assurance
that once the inner direction has found its way and its implications have come
to the surface, the result will be no mere Asiatic modification of Western
modernism, but some great, new and original thing of the first importance to
the future of human civilisation.
\par This was not the idea of the earliest generation of intellectuals, few in
number but powerful by their talent and originative vigour, that arose as the
first result of Western education in India. Theirs was the impatient hope of a
transformation such as took place afterwards with so striking a velocity in
Japan;
Page 18

they saw in welcome prospect a new India modernised wholesale and
radically in mind, spirit and life. Intensely patriotic in motive, they were yet
denationalised in their mental attitude. They admitted practically, if not in set
opinion, the occidental view of our past culture as only a half-civilisation and
their governing ideals were borrowed from the West or at least centrally
inspired by the purely Western spirit and type of their education. From
mediaeval India they drew away in revolt and inclined to discredit and
destroy whatever it had created; if they took anything from it, it was as poetic
symbols to which they gave a superficial and modern significance. To ancient
India they looked back on the contrary with a sentiment of pride, at least in
certain directions, and were willing to take from it whatever material they
could subdue to their new standpoint, but they could not quite grasp anything
of it in its original sense and spirit and strove to rid it of all that would not
square with their Westernised intellectuality. They sought for a bare,
simplified and rationalised religion, created a literature which imported very
eagerly the forms, ideas and whole spirit of their English models,—the value
of the other arts was almost entirely ignored,—put their political faith and
hope in a wholesale assimilation or rather an exact imitation of the
middle-class pseudo-democracy of nineteenth-century England, would have
revolutionised Indian society by introducing into it all the social ideas and main
features of the European form. Whatever value for the future there may be
in the things they grasped at with this eager conviction, their method was, as
we now recognise, a false method,—an anglicised India is a thing we can no
longer view as either possible or desirable,—and it could only, if pursued to
the end, have made us painful copyists, clumsy followers always stumbling in
the wake of European evolution and always fifty years behind it. This
movement of thought did not and could not endure; something of it still
continues, but its engrossing power has passed away beyond any chance of
vigorous revival.
\par Nevertheless, this earliest period of crude reception left behind it results
that were of value and indeed indispensable to a powerful renaissance. We
may single out three of them as
Page 19

of the first order of importance. It reawakened a free activity of the intellect
which, though at first confined within very narrow bounds and derivative in its
ideas, is now spreading to all subjects of human and national interest and is
applying itself with an increasing curiosity and a growing originality to every
field it seizes. This is bringing back to the Indian mind its old unresting thirst
for all kinds of knowledge and must restore to it before long the width of its
range and the depth and flexible power of its action; and it has opened to it
the full scope of the critical faculty of the human mind, its passion for
exhaustive observation and emancipated judgment which, in older times
exercised only by a few and within limits, has now become an essential
equipment of the intellect. These things the imitative period did not itself carry
very far, but it cast the germ which we now see beginning to fructify more
richly. Secondly, it threw definitely the ferment of modern ideas into the old
culture and fixed them before our view in such a way that we are obliged to
reckon and deal with them in far other sort than would have been possible if
we had simply proceeded from our old fixed traditions without some such
momentary violent break in our customary view of things. Finally, it made us
turn our look upon all that our past contains with new eyes which have not
only enabled us to recover something of their ancient sense and spirit, long
embedded and lost in the unintelligent practice of received forms, but to bring
out of them a new light which gives to the old truths fresh aspects and
therefore novel potentialities of creation and evolution. That in this first period
we misunderstood our ancient culture, does not matter; the enforcement of a
reconsideration, which even orthodox thought has been obliged to accept, is
the fact of capital importance.
\par The second period of reaction of the Indian mind upon the new elements,
its movement towards a recovery of the national poise, has helped us to
direct these powers and tendencies into sounder and much more fruitful lines
of action. For the anglicising impulse was very soon met by the old national
spirit and began to be heavily suffused by its influence. It is now a very small
and always dwindling number of our present-day
Page 20

intellectuals who still remain obstinately Westernised in their outlook; and
even these have given up the attitude of blatant and uncompromising
depreciation of the past which was at one time a common pose. A larger
number have proceeded by a constantly increasing suffusion of their
modernism with much of ancient motive and sentiment, a better insight into
the meaning of Indian things and their characteristics, a free acceptance
more of their spirit than of their forms and an attempt at new interpretation.
At first the central idea still remained very plainly of the modern type and
betrayed everywhere the Western inspiration, but it drew to itself willingly the
ancient ideas and it coloured itself more and more with their essential spirit;
and latterly this suffusing element has overflooded, has tended more and
more to take up and subdue the original motives until the thought and spirit,
turn and tinge are now characteristically Indian. The works of Bankim
Chandra Chatterji and Tagore, the two minds of the most distinctive and
original genius in our recent literature, illustrate the stages of this transition.
\par Side by side with this movement and more characteristic and powerful
there has been flowing an opposite current. This first started on its way by an
integral reaction, a vindication and reacceptance of everything Indian as it
stood and because it was Indian. We have still waves of this impulse and
many of its influences continuing among us; for its work is not yet completed.
But in reality the reaction marks the beginning of a more subtle assimilation
and fusing; for in vindicating ancient things it has been obliged to do so in a
way that will at once meet and satisfy the old mentality and the new, the
traditional and the critical mind. This in itself involves no mere return, but
consciously or unconsciously hastens a restatement. And the riper form of
the return has taken as its principle a synthetical restatement; it has sought to
arrive at the spirit of the ancient culture and, while respecting its forms and
often preserving them to revivify, has yet not hesitated also to remould, to
reject the outworn and to admit whatever new motive seemed assimilable to
the old spirituality or apt to widen the channel of its larger evolution. Of this
freer dealing with past and present, this preservation
Page 21

by reconstruction Vivekananda was in his life-time the leading exemplar and
the most powerful exponent.
\par But this too could not be the end; of itself it leads towards a principle of
new creation. Otherwise the upshot of the \NH double current of thought and
tendency might be an incongruous assimilation, something in the mental
sphere like the strangely assorted half-European, half-Indian dress which we
now put upon our bodies. India has to get back entirely to the native power of
her spirit at its very deepest and to turn all the needed strengths and aims of
her present and future life into materials for that spirit to work upon and
integrate and harmonise. Of such vital and original creation we may cite the
new Indian art as a striking example. The beginning of this process of original
creation in every sphere of her national activity will be the sign of the integral
self-finding of her renaissance.
Page 22

\par
\ht The Renaissance in India–3
\par\drop To attempt to penetrate through the indeterminate confusion of
present tendencies and first efforts in order to foresee the exact forms the
new creation will take, would be an effort of very doubtful utility. One might
as well try to forecast a harmony from the sounds made by the tuning of the
instrument. In one direction or another we may just detect certain decisive
indications, but even these are only first indications and we may be quite sure
that much lies behind them that will go far beyond anything that they yet
suggest. This is true whether in religion and spirituality or thought and
science, poetry and art or society and politics. Everywhere there is, at most,
only a beginning of beginnings.
\par One thing seems at any rate certain, that the spiritual motive will be in
the future of India, as in her past, the real originative and dominating strain.
By spirituality we do not mean a remote metaphysical mind or the tendency
to dream rather than to act. That was not the great India of old in her
splendid days of vigour,—whatever certain European critics or interpreters of
her culture may say,—and it will not be the India of the future. Metaphysical
thinking will always no doubt be a strong element in her mentality, and it is to
be hoped that she will never lose her great, her sovereign powers in that
direction; but Indian metaphysics are as far removed from the brilliant or the
profound idea-spinning of the French or the German mind as from the broad
intellectual generalising on the basis of the facts of physical science which for
some time did duty for philosophy in modern Europe. It has always been in its
essential parts an intellectual approach to spiritual realisation. Though in later
times it led too much away from life, yet that was not its original character
whether in its early Vedantic intuitional forms or in those later developments
of it, such as the Gita, which belong
Page 23

to the period of its most vigorous intellectual originality and creation.
Buddhism itself, the philosophy which first really threw doubt on the value of
life, did so only in its intellectual tendency; in its dynamic parts, by its ethical
system and spiritual method, it gave a new set of values, a severe vigour, yet
a gentler idealism to human living and was therefore powerfully creative both
in the arts which interpret life and in society and politics. To realise intimately
truth of spirit and to quicken and to remould life by it is the native tendency of
the Indian mind, and to that it must always return in all its periods of health,
greatness and vigour.
\par All great movements of life in India have begun with a new spiritual
thought and usually a new religious activity. What more striking and
significant fact can there be than this that even the new European influence,
which was an influence intellectual, rationalistic, so often antireligious and
which drew so much of its idealism from the increasingly cosmopolitan,
mundane and secularist thought of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries,
precipitated in India from the very first an attempt at religious reformation
and led actually to the creation of new religions? The instinct of the Indian
mind was that, if a reconstruction of ideas and of society was to be
attempted, it must start from a spiritual basis and take from the first a
religious motive and form. The Brahmo Samaj had in its inception a large
cosmopolitan idea, it was even almost eclectic in the choice of the materials
for the synthesis it attempted; it combined a Vedantic first inspiration,
outward forms akin to those of English Unitarianism and something of its
temper, a modicum of Christian influence, a strong dose of religious
rationalism and intellectualism. It is noteworthy, however, that it started from
an endeavour to restate the Vedanta, and it is curiously significant of the way
in which even what might be well called a protestant movement follows the
curve of the national tradition and temper, that the three stages of its growth,
marked by the three churches or congregations into which it split, correspond
to the three eternal motives of the Indian religious mind, Jnana, Bhakti and
Karma, the contemplative and philosophical, the emotional and fervently
devotional and the actively and practically dynamic
Page 24

spiritual mentality. The Arya Samaj in the Punjab founded itself on a fresh
interpretation of the truth of the Veda and an attempt to apply old Vedic
principles of life to modern conditions. The movement associated with the
great names of Ramakrishna and Vivekananda has been a very wide
synthesis of past religious motives and spiritual experience topped by a
reaffirmation of the old asceticism and monasticism, but with new living
strands in it and combined with a strong humanitarianism and zeal of
missionary expansion. There has been too the movement of orthodox Hindu
revivalism, more vigorous two or three decades ago than it is now. The rest
of India has either felt vibrations of some of these great regional movements
or been touched with smaller ones of their own making. In Bengal a strong
Neo-Vaishnavic tendency is the most recent development of its religious
mind and shows that the preparatory creative activity has not yet finished its
workings. Throughout India the old religious sects and disciplines are
becoming strongly revitalised, vocal, active, moved to a fresh self-affirmation.
Islam has recently shared in the general stirring and attempts to return vitally
to the original Islamic ideals or to strike out fresh developments have
preceded or accompanied the awakening to life of the long torpid Mussulman
mass in India.
\par Perhaps none of these forms, nor all the sum of them may be definitive,
they may constitute only the preparatory self-finding of the Indian spiritual
mind recovering its past and turning towards its future. India is the
meeting-place of the religions and among these Hinduism alone is by itself a
vast and complex thing, not so much a religion as a great diversified and yet
\NH subtly unified mass of spiritual thought, realisation and aspiration. What
will finally come out of all this stir and ferment, lies yet in the future. There
has been an introduction of fresh fruitful impulses to activity: there has been
much revival of the vitality of old forms, a new study, rehabilitation, resort to
old disciplines and old authorities and scriptures,—we may note that Vedanta,
Veda, Purana, Yoga, and recently the same thing is being initiated with
regard to the Tantra, have each in their turn been brought back into
understanding, if not always yet to a perfect
Page 25

understanding, to practice, to some efficacy on thought and on life; there has
been an evolution of enlarging truth and novel forms out of ancient ideas and
renewed experience. Whatever the last upshot may be, this spiritual and
religious ferment and activity stand out as the most prominent feature of the
new India; and it may be observed that while in other fields the tendency has
been, until quite recently, more critical than constructive, here every impulse
has been throughout powerfully creative. Especially, we see everywhere the
tendency towards the return of the spirit upon life; the reassertion of a
spiritual living as a foundation for a new life of the nation has been a
recognisable impulse. Even asceticism and monasticism are rapidly becoming,
no longer merely contemplative, self-centred or aloof, but missionary,
educative, humanitarian. And recently in the utterances of the leaders of
thought the insistence on life has been growing marked, self-conscious and
positive. This is at present the most significant immediate sign of the future.
Probably, here lies the key of the Indian renaissance, in a return from forms
to the depths of a released spirituality which will show itself again in a
pervading return of spirituality upon life.
\par But what are likely to be the great constructive ideas and the great
decisive instruments which this spirituality will take to deal with and govern
life, is as yet obscure, because the thought of this new India is still inchoate
and indeterminative. Religions, creeds and forms are only a characteristic
outward sign of the spiritual impulsion and religion itself is the intensive action
by which it tries to find its inward force. Its expansive movement comes in
the thought which it throws out on life, the ideals which open up new horizons
and which the intellect accepts and life labours to assimilate. Philosophy in
India has been the intellectual canaliser of spiritual knowledge and
experience, but the philosophical intellect has not as yet decidedly begun the
work of new creation; it has been rather busy with the restatement of its past
gains than with any new statement which would visibly and rapidly enlarge
the boundaries of its thought and aspiration. The contact of European
philosophy has not been fruitful of any creative reaction; first because the
Page 26

past philosophies of Europe have very little that could be of any utility in this
direction, nothing of the first importance in fact which India has not already
stated in forms better suited to her own spiritual temper and genius, and
though the thought of Nietzsche, of Bergson and of James has recently
touched more vitally just a few minds here and there, their drift is much too
externally pragmatic and vitalistic to be genuinely assimilable by the Indian
spirit. But, principally, a real Indian philosophy can only be evolved out of
spiritual experience and as the fruit of the spiritual seeking which all the
religious movements of the past century have helped to generalise. It cannot
spring, as in Europe, out of the critical intellect solely or as the fruit of
scientific thought and knowledge. Nor has there been very much preparing
force of original critical thought in nineteenth century India. The more original
intellects have either turned towards pure literature or else been busy
assimilating and at most Indianising modern ideas. And though a stronger
thought tendency is now beginning, all is yet uncertain flux or brilliantly vague
foreshadowing.
\par In poetry, literature, art, science there have, on the contrary, been
definite beginnings. Bengal in these, as in many other directions, has been
recently the chief testing crucible or the first workshop of the Shakti of India;
it is there she has chosen to cast in the greatest vivacity of new influences
and develop her initial forms and inspirations. In the rest of India there is
often much activity of production and one hears here and there of a solitary
poet or prose-writer of genius or notable talent; but Bengal has already a
considerable literature of importance, with a distinct spirit and form,
well-based and always developing; she has now a great body of art original,
inspired, full of delicate beauty and vision; she has not only two renowned
scientists, one of the two world-famous for a central and far-reaching
discovery, but a young school of research which promises to count for
something in the world's science. It is here therefore that we can observe the
trend of the Indian mind and the direction in which it is turning. Especially the
art of the Bengal painters is very significant, more so even than the prose of
Bankim or the poetry
Page 27

of Tagore. Bengali poetry has had to feel its way and does not seem yet quite
definitively to have found it, but Bengal art has found its way at once at the
first step, by a sort of immediate intuition.
\par Partly this is because the new literature began in the period of foreign
influence and of an indecisive groping, while art in India was quite
silent,—except for the preposterous Ravi Varma interlude which was
doomed to sterility by its absurdly barren incompetence,—began in a moment
of self-recovery and could profit by a clearer possibility of light. But besides,
plastic art is in itself by its very limitation, by the narrower and intense range
of its forms and motives, often more decisively indicative than the more fluid
and variable turns of literary thought and expression. Now the whole power
of the Bengal artists springs from their deliberate choice of the spirit and
hidden meaning in things rather than their form and surface meaning as the
object to be expressed. It is intuitive and its forms are the very rhythm of its
intuition, they have little to do with the metric formalities devised by the
observing intellect; it leans over the finite to discover its suggestions of the
infinite and inexpressible; it turns to outward life and nature to found upon it
lines and colours, rhythms and embodiments which will be significant of the
other life and other nature than the physical which all that is merely outward
conceals. This is the eternal motive of Indian art, but applied in a new way
less largely ideaed, mythological and symbolical, but with a more delicately
suggestive attempt at a near, subtle, direct embodiment. This art is a true new
creation, and we may expect that the artistic mind of the rest of India will
follow through the gate thus opened, but we may expect it too to take on
there other characteristics and find other ways of expression; for the peculiar
turn and tone given by the Calcutta painters is intimate to the temperament of
Bengal. But India is great by the unity of her national coupled with the rich
diversity of her regional mind. That we may expect to see reflected in the
resurgence of her artistic creativeness.
\par Poetry and literature in Bengal have gone through two distinct stages
and seem to be preparing for a third of which one
Page 28

cannot quite foresee the character. It began with a European and mostly an
English influence, a taking in of fresh poetical and prose forms, literary ideas,
artistic canons. It was a period of copious and buoyant creation which
produced a number of poets and poetesses, one or two of great genius, others
of a fine poetic capacity, much work of beauty and distinction, a real opening
of the floodgates of Saraswati. Its work was not at all crudely imitative; the
foreign influences are everywhere visible, but they are assimilated, not
merely obeyed or aped. The quality of the Bengali temperament and its
native aesthetic turn took hold of them and poured them into a mould of
speech suitable to its own spirit. But still the substance was not quite native to
the soul and therefore one feels a certain void in it. The form and expression
have the peculiar grace and the delicate plastic beauty which Bengali poetical
expression achieved from its beginning, but the thing expressed does not in
the end amount to very much. As is inevitable when one does not think or
create freely but is principally assimilating thought and form, it is thin and falls
short of the greatness which we would expect from the natural power of the
poet.
\par That period is long over, it has lived its time and its work has taken its
place in the past of the literature. Two of its creators, one, the sovereign
initiator of its prose expression, supreme by combination of original mentality
with a flawless artistic gift, the other born into its last glow of productive
brilliance, but outliving it to develop another strain and a profounder voice of
poetry, released the real soul of Bengal into expression. The work of Bankim
Chandra is now of the past, because it has entered already into the new mind
of Bengal which it did more than any other literary influence to form; the
work of Rabindranath still largely holds the present, but it has opened ways
for the future which promise to go beyond it. Both show an increasing return
to the Indian spirit in fresh forms; both are voices of the dawn, seek more
than they find, suggest and are calling for more than they actually evoke. At
present we see a fresh preparation, on one side evolving and promising to
broaden out from the influence of Tagore, on the other in revolt against it and
insisting on a more
Page 29

distinctively national type of inspiration and creation; but what will come out
of it, is not yet clear. On the whole it appears that the movement is turning in
the same direction as that of the new art, though with the more flexible
utterance and varied motive natural to the spoken thought and expressive
word. No utterance of the highest genius, such as would give the decisive
turn, has yet made itself heard. But some faint promise of a great imaginative
and intuitive literature of a new Indian type is already discernible in these
uncertain voices.
\par In the things of the mind we have then within however limited an area
certain beginnings, preparatory or even initially definitive. But in the outward
life of the nation we are still in a stage of much uncertainty and confusion.
Very largely this is due to the political conditions which have ceased in spirit
to be those of the past, but are not yet in fact those of the future. The fever
and the strain born from the alternation of waves of aspiration with the reflux
of non-fulfilment are not favourable to the strong formulation of a new birth
in the national life. All that is as yet clear is that the first period of a
superficial assimilation and aping of European political ideas and methods is
over. Another political spirit has awakened in the people under the shock of
the movement of the last decade which, vehemently national in its motive,
proclaimed a religion of Indian patriotism, applied the notions of the ancient
religion and philosophy to politics, expressed the cult of the country as mother
and Shakti and attempted to base the idea of democracy firmly on the
spiritual thought and impulses native to the Indian mind. Crude often and
uncertain in its self-expression, organising its effort for revolt against past and
present conditions but not immediately successful in carrying forward its
methods of constructive development, it still effectively aroused the people
and gave a definite turn to its political thought and life, the outcome of which
can only appear when the nation has found completely the will and gained
sufficiently the power to determine its own evolution.
\par Indian society is in a still more chaotic stage; for the old forms are
crumbling away under the pressure of the environment, their spirit and reality
are more and more passing out of
Page 30

them, but the fa\c{c}ade persists by the force of inertia of thought and will and
the remaining attachment of a long association, while the new is still
powerless to be born. There is much of slow and often hardly perceptible
destruction, a dull preservation effective only by immobility, no possibility yet
of sound reconstruction. We have had a loud proclaiming,—only where
supported by religion, as in the reforming Samajes, any strong
effectuation,—of a movement of social change, appealing sometimes crudely
to Western exemplars and ideals, sometimes to the genius or the pattern of
ancient times; but it has quite failed to carry the people, because it could not
get at their spirit and itself lacked, with the exceptions noted, in robust
sincerity. We have had too a revival of orthodox conservatism, more
academic and sentimental than profound in its impulse or in touch with the
great facts and forces of life. We have now in emergence an increasing
sense of the necessity of a renovation of social ideas and expressive forms
by the spirit of the nation awaking to the deeper yet unexpressed implications
of its own culture, but as yet no sufficient will or means of execution. It is
probable that only with the beginning of a freer national life will the powers of
the renaissance take effective hold of the social mind and action of the
awakened people.
Page 31

\par
\ht The Renaissance in India–4
\par\drop The renaissance thus determining itself, but not yet finally
determined, if it is to be what the name implies, a rebirth of the soul of India
into a new body of energy, a new form of its innate and ancient spirit,
\s{praj\~n\=a pur\=a\,n\=i}, must insist much more finally and integrally than it has as
yet done on its spiritual turn, on the greater and greater action of the spiritual
motive in every sphere of our living. But here we are still liable to be met by
the remnants of a misunderstanding or a refusal to understand,—it is
something of both,—which was perhaps to a little extent justified by certain
ascetic or religionist exaggerations, a distrust which is accentuated by a recoil
from the excessive other-worldliness that has marked certain developments
of the Indian mind and life, but yet is not justified, because it misses the true
point at issue. Thus we are sometimes asked what on earth we mean by
spirituality in art and poetry or in political and social life,—a confession of
ignorance strange enough in any Indian mouth at this stage of our national
history,—or how art and poetry will be any the better when they have got
into them what I have recently seen described as the “twang of spirituality”,
and how the practical problems either of society or of politics are going at all
to profit by this element. We have here really an echo of the European idea,
now of sufficiently long standing, that religion and spirituality on the one side
and intellectual activity and practical life on the other are two entirely
different things and have each to be pursued on its own entirely separate
lines and in obedience to its own entirely separate principles. Again we may
be met also by the suspicion that in holding up this ideal rule before India we
are pointing her to the metaphysical and away from the dynamic and
pragmatic or inculcating some obscurantist reactionary principle of mystical
or irrational religiosity and diverting her from the
Page 32

paths of reason and modernity which she must follow if she is to be an
efficient and a well-organised nation able to survive in the shocks of the
modern world. We must therefore try to make clear what it is we mean by a
renaissance governed by the principle of spirituality.
\par But first let us say what we do not mean by this ideal. Clearly it does not
signify that we shall regard earthly life as a temporal vanity, try to become all
of us as soon as possible monastic ascetics, frame our social life into a
preparation for the monastery or cavern or mountain-top or make of it a
static life without any great progressive ideals but only some aim which has
nothing to do with earth or the collective advance of the human race. That
may have been for some time a tendency of the Indian mind, but it was never
the whole tendency. Nor does spirituality mean the moulding of the whole
type of the national being to suit the limited dogmas, forms, tenets of a
particular religion, as was often enough attempted by the old societies, an
idea which still persists in many minds by the power of old mental habit and
association; clearly such an attempt would be impossible, even if it were
desirable, in a country full of the most diverse religious opinions and
harbouring too three such distinct general forms as Hinduism, Islam and
Christianity, to say nothing of the numerous special forms to which each of
these has given birth. Spirituality is much wider than any particular religion,
and in the larger ideas of it that are now coming on us even the greatest
religion becomes no more than a broad sect or branch of the one universal
religion, by which we shall understand in the future man's seeking for the
eternal, the divine, the greater self, the source of unity and his attempt to
arrive at some equation, some increasing approximation of the values of
human life with the eternal and the divine values.
\par Nor do we mean the exclusion of anything whatsoever from our scope,
of any of the great aims of human life, any of the great problems of our
modern world, any form of human activity, any general or inherent impulse or
characteristic means of the desire of the soul of man for development,
expansion, increasing vigour and joy, light, power, perfection. Spirit without
mind,
Page 33

spirit without body is not the type of man, therefore a human spirituality must
not belittle the mind, life or body or hold them of small account: it will rather
hold them of high account, of immense importance, precisely because they
are the conditions and instruments of the life of the spirit in man. The ancient
Indian culture attached quite as much value to the soundness, growth and
strength of the mind, life and body as the old Hellenic or the modern scientific
thought, although for a different end and a greater motive. Therefore to
everything that serves and belongs to the healthy fullness of these things, it
gave free play, to the activity of the reason, to science and philosophy, to the
satisfaction of the aesthetic being and to all the many arts great or small, to
the health and strength of the body, to the physical and economical
well-being, ease, opulence of the race,—there was never a national ideal of
poverty in India as some would have us believe, nor was bareness or squalor
the essential setting of her spirituality,—and to its general military, political
and social strength and efficiency. Their aim was high, but firm and wide too
was the base they sought to establish and great the care bestowed on these
first instruments. Necessarily the new India will seek the same end in new
ways under the vivid impulse of fresh and large ideas and by an
instrumentality suited to more complex conditions; but the scope of her effort
and action and the suppleness and variety of her mind will not be less, but
greater than of old. Spirituality is not necessarily exclusive; it can be and in its
fullness must be all-inclusive.
\par But still there is a great difference between the spiritual and the purely
material and mental view of existence. The spiritual view holds that the mind,
life, body are man's means and not his aims and even that they are not his
last and highest means; it sees them as his outer instrumental self and not his
whole being. It sees the infinite behind all things finite and it adjudges the
value of the finite by higher infinite values of which they are the imperfect
translation and towards which, to a truer expression of them, they are always
trying to arrive. It sees a greater reality than the apparent not only behind
man and the world, but within man and the world, and this soul, self, divine
thing in man it
Page 34

holds to be that in him which is of the highest importance, that which
everything else in him must try in whatever way to bring out and express, and
this soul, self, divine presence in the world it holds to be that which man has
ever to try to see and recognise through all appearances, to unite his thought
and life with it and in it to find his unity with his fellows. This alters
necessarily our whole normal view of things; even in preserving all the aims
of human life, it will give them a different sense and direction.
\par We aim at the health and vigour of the body; but with what object? For
its own sake, will be the ordinary reply, because it is worth having; or else
that we may have long life and a sound basis for our intellectual, vital,
emotional satisfactions. Yes, for its own sake, in a way, but in this sense that
the physical too is an expression of the spirit and its perfection is worth
having, is part of the dharma of the complete human living; but still more as a
basis for all that higher activity which ends in the discovery and expression of
the divine self in man. \s{\'Sar\=ira\.m khalu dharma-s\=adhanam}, runs the old
Sanskrit saying, the body too is our means for fulfilling the dharma, the
Godward law of our being. The mental, the emotional, the aesthetic parts of
us have to be developed, is the ordinary view, so that they may have a
greater satisfaction, or because that is man's finer nature, because so he feels
himself more alive and fulfilled. This, but not this only; rather because these
things too are the expressions of the spirit, things which are seeking in him for
their divine values and by their growth, subtlety, flexibility, power, intensity he
is able to come nearer to the divine Reality in the world, to lay hold on it
variously, to tune eventually his whole life into unity and conformity with it.
Morality is in the ordinary view a well-regulated individual and social conduct
which keeps society going and leads towards a better, a more rational,
temperate, sympathetic, self-restrained dealing with our fellows. But ethics in
the spiritual point of view is much more, it is a means of developing in our
action and still more essentially in the character of our being the diviner self
in us, a step of our growing into the nature of the Godhead.
\par So with all our aims and activities; spirituality takes them
Page 35

all and gives them a greater, diviner, more intimate sense. Philosophy is in the
Western way of dealing with it a dispassionate enquiry by the light of the
reason into the first truths of existence, which we shall get at either by
observing the facts science places at our disposal or by a careful dialectical
scrutiny of the concepts of the reason or a mixture of the two methods. But
from the spiritual view-point truth of existence is to be found by intuition and
inner experience and not only by the reason and by scientific observation; the
work of philosophy is to arrange the data given by the various means of
knowledge, excluding none, and put them into their synthetic relation to the
one Truth, the one supreme and universal reality. Eventually, its real value is
to prepare a basis for spiritual realisation and the growing of the human being
into his divine self and divine nature. Science itself becomes only a
knowledge of the world which throws an added light on the spirit of the
universe and his way in things. Nor will it confine itself to a physical
knowledge and its practical fruits or to the knowledge of life and man and
mind based upon the idea of matter or material energy as our starting-point; a
spiritualised culture will make room for new fields of research, for new and
old psychical sciences and results which start from spirit as the first truth and
from the power of mind and of what is greater than mind to act upon life and
matter. The primitive aim of art and poetry is to create images of man and
Nature which shall satisfy the sense of beauty and embody artistically the
ideas of the intelligence about life and the responses of the imagination to it;
but in a spiritual culture they become too in their aim a revelation of greater
things concealed in man and Nature and of the deepest spiritual and universal
beauty. Politics, society, economy are in the first form of human life simply
an arrangement by which men collectively can live, produce, satisfy their
desires, enjoy, progress in bodily, vital and mental efficiency; but the spiritual
aim makes them much more than this, first, a framework of life within which
man can seek for and grow into his real self and divinity, secondly, an
increasing embodiment of the divine law of being in life, thirdly, a collective
advance towards the light, power, peace, unity, harmony of the diviner
Page 36

nature of humanity which the race is trying to evolve. This and nothing more
but nothing less, this in all its potentialities, is what we mean by a spiritual
culture and the application of spirituality to life.
\par Those who distrust this ideal or who cannot understand it, are still under
the sway of the European conception of life which for a time threatened to
swamp entirely the Indian spirit. But let us remember that Europe itself is
labouring to outgrow the limitations of its own conceptions and precisely by a
rapid infusion of the ideas of the East,—naturally, essential ideas and not the
mere forms,—which have been first infiltrating and are now more freely
streaming into Western thought, poetry, art, ideas of life, not to overturn its
culture, but to transform, enlighten and aggrandise its best values and to add
new elements which have too long been ignored or forgotten. It will be
singular if while Europe is thus intelligently enlarging herself in the new light
she has been able to seize and admitting the truths of the spirit and the aim at
a divine change in man and his life, we in India are to take up the cast-off
clothes of European thought and life and to straggle along in the old rut of her
wheels, always taking up today what she had cast off yesterday. We should
not allow our cultural independence to be paralysed by the accident that at
the moment Europe came in upon us, we were in a state of ebb and
weakness, such as comes some day upon all civilisations. That no more
proves that our spirituality, our culture, our leading ideas were entirely
mistaken and the best we can do is vigorously to Europeanise, rationalise,
materialise ourselves in the practical parts of life,—keeping perhaps some
spirituality, religion, Indianism as a graceful decoration in the
background,—than the great catastrophe of the war proves that Europe's
science, her democracy, her progress were all wrong and she should return
to the Middle Ages or imitate the culture of China or Turkey or Tibet. Such
generalisations are the facile falsehoods of a hasty and unreflecting
ignorance.
\par We have both made mistakes, faltered in the true application of our
ideals, been misled into unhealthy exaggerations. Europe has understood the
lesson, she is striving to correct herself;
Page 37

but she does not for this reason forswear science, democracy, progress, but
purposes to complete and perfect them, to use them better, to give them a
sounder direction. She is admitting the light of the East, but on the basis of
her own way of thinking and living, opening herself to truth of the spirit, but
not abandoning her own truth of life and science and social ideals. We should
be as faithful, as free in our dealings with the Indian spirit and modern
influences; correct what went wrong with us; apply our spirituality on broader
and freer lines, be if possible not less but more spiritual than were our
forefathers; admit Western science, reason, progressiveness, the essential
modern ideas, but on the basis of our own way of life and assimilated to our
spiritual aim and ideal; open ourselves to the throb of life, the pragmatic
activity, the great modern endeavour, but not therefore abandon our
fundamental view of God and man and Nature. There is no real quarrel
between them; for rather these two things need each other to fill themselves
in, to discover all their own implications, to awaken to their own richest and
completest significances.
\par India can best develop herself and serve humanity by being herself and
following the law of her own nature. This does not mean, as some narrowly
and blindly suppose, the rejection of everything new that comes to us in the
stream of Time or happens to have been first developed or powerfully
expressed by the West. Such an attitude would be intellectually absurd,
physically impossible, and above all unspiritual; true spirituality rejects no new
light, no added means or materials of our human self-development. It means
simply to keep our centre, our essential way of being, our inborn nature and
assimilate to it all we receive, and evolve out of it all we do and create.
Religion has been a central preoccupation of the Indian mind; some have told
us that too much religion ruined India, precisely because we made the whole
of life religion or religion the whole of life, we have failed in life and gone
under. I will not answer, adopting the language used by the poet in a slightly
different connection, that our fall does not matter and that the dust in which
India lies is sacred. The fall, the failure does matter, and to lie in the dust is
no sound position for man or nation. But the reason assigned
Page 38

is not the true one. If the majority of Indians had indeed made the whole of
their lives religion in the true sense of the word, we should not be where we
are now; it was because their public life became most irreligious, egoistic,
self-seeking, materialistic that they fell. It is possible, that on one side we
deviated too much into an excessive religiosity, that is to say, an excessive
externalism of ceremony, rule, routine, mechanical worship, on the other into
a too world-shunning asceticism which drew away the best minds who were
thus lost to society instead of standing like the ancient Rishis as its spiritual
support and its illuminating life-givers. But the root of the matter was the
dwindling of the spiritual impulse in its generality and broadness, the decline
of intellectual activity and freedom, the waning of great ideals, the loss of the
gust of life.
\par Perhaps there was too much of religion in one sense; the word is
English, smacks too much of things external such as creeds, rites, an external
piety; there is no one Indian equivalent. But if we give rather to religion the
sense of the following of the spiritual impulse in its fullness and define
spirituality as the attempt to know and live in the highest self, the divine, the
all-embracing unity and to raise life in all its parts to the divinest possible
values, then it is evident that there was not too much of religion, but rather
too little of it—and in what there was, a too one-sided and therefore an
insufficiently ample tendency. The right remedy is, not to belittle still farther
the agelong ideal of India, but to return to its old amplitude and give it a still
wider scope, to make in very truth all the life of the nation a religion in this
high spiritual sense. This is the direction in which the philosophy, poetry, art
of the West is, still more or less obscurely, but with an increasing light,
beginning to turn, and even some faint glints of the truth are beginning now to
fall across political and sociological ideals. India has the key to the knowledge
and conscious application of the ideal; what was dark to her before in its
application, she can now, with a new light, illumine; what was wrong and wry
in her old methods she can now rectify; the fences which she created to
protect the outer growth of the spiritual ideal and which afterwards became
Page 39

barriers to its expansion and farther application, she can now break down and
give her spirit a freer field and an ampler flight: she can, if she will, give a
new and decisive turn to the problems over which all mankind is labouring
and stumbling, for the clue to their solutions is there in her ancient knowledge.
Whether she will rise or not to the height of her opportunity in the
renaissance which is coming upon her, is the question of her destiny.

\book
\par
Page 40

\ht Indian Culture and External Influence

\section
\par
Page 41

\ht Indian Culture and External Influence
\par\drop In considering Indian civilisation and its renascence, I suggested
that a powerful new creation in all fields was our great need, the meaning of
the renascence and the one way of preserving the civilisation. Confronted
with the huge rush of modern life and thought, invaded by another dominant
civilisation almost her opposite or inspired at least with a very different spirit
to her own, India can only survive by confronting this raw, new, aggressive,
powerful world with fresh diviner creations of her own spirit, cast in the
mould of her own spiritual ideals. She must meet it by solving its greater
problems,—which she cannot avoid, even if such avoidance could be thought
desirable,—in her own way, through solutions arising out of her own being
and from her own deepest and largest knowledge. In that connection I spoke
of the acceptance and assimilation from the West of whatever in its
knowledge, ideas, powers was assimilable, compatible with her spirit,
reconcilable with her ideals, valuable for a new statement of life. This
question of external influence and new creation from within is of very
considerable importance; it calls for more than a passing mention. Especially
it is necessary to form some more precise idea of what we mean by
acceptance and of the actual effect of assimilation; for this is a problem of
pressing incidence in which we have to get our ideas clear and fix firmly and
seeingly on our line of solution.
\par But it is possible to hold that while new creation—and not a motionless
sticking to old forms—is our one way of life and salvation, no acceptance of
anything Western is called for, we can find in ourselves all that we need; no
considerable acceptance is possible without creating a breach which will
bring pouring in the rest of the occidental deluge. That, if I have not misread
it, is the sense of a comment on these articles in a
Page 43

Bengali literary periodical
\note{{\it Narayan}, edited by Mr. C. R. Das.} which holds up the ideal of a
new creation to arise from within entirely on national lines and in the national
spirit. The writer takes his stand on a position which is common ground, that
humanity is one, but different peoples are variant soul-forms of the common
humanity. When we find the oneness, the principle of variation is not
destroyed but finds rather its justification; it is not by abolishing ourselves, our
own special temperament and power, that we can get at the living oneness,
but by following it out and raising it to its highest possibilities of freedom and
action. That is a truth which I have myself insisted on repeatedly, with regard
to the modern idea and attempt at some kind of political unification of
humanity, as a very important part of the psychological sense of social
development, and again in this question of a particular people's life and
culture in all its parts and manifestations. I have insisted that uniformity is not
a real but a dead unity: uniformity kills life while real unity, if well founded,
becomes vigorous and fruitful by a rich energy of variation. But the writer
adds that the idea of taking over what is best in occidental civilisation, is a
false notion without a living meaning; to leave the bad and take the good
sounds very well, but this bad and this good are not separable in that way:
they are the inextricably mingled growth of one being, not separate blocks of
a child's toy house set side by side and easily detachable,—and what is meant
then by cutting out and taking one element and leaving the rest? If we take
over a Western ideal, we take it over from a living form which strikes us; we
imitate that form, are subjugated by its spirit and natural tendencies, and the
good and bad intertwined in the living growth come in upon us together and
take united possession. In fact, we have been for a long time so imitating the
West, trying to become like it or partly like it and have fortunately failed, for
that would have meant creating a bastard or twy-natured culture; but
twy-natured, as Tennyson makes his Lucretius say, is no-natured and a
bastard culture is no sound, truth-living
Page 44

culture. An entire return upon ourselves is our only way of salvation.
\par There is much to be said here, it seems to me, both in the way of
confirmation and of modification. But let us be clear about the meaning of our
terms. That the attempt in the last century which still in some directions
continues,—to imitate European civilisation and to make ourselves a sort of
brown Englishmen, to throw our ancient culture into the dust-bin and put on
the livery or uniform of the West was a mistaken and illegitimate endeavour,
I heartily agree. At the same time a certain amount of imitation, a great
amount even, was, one might almost say, a biological necessity, at any rate a
psychological necessity of the situation. Not only when a lesser meets a
greater culture, but when a culture which has fallen into a state of
comparative inactivity, sleep, contraction, is faced with, still more when it
receives the direct shock of a waking, active, tremendously creative
civilisation, finds thrown upon it novel and successful powers and
functionings, sees an immense succession and development of new ideas and
formations, it is impelled by the very instinct of life to take over these ideas
and forms, to annex, to enrich itself, even to imitate and reproduce, and in one
way or in another take large account and advantage of these new forces and
opportunities. That is a phenomenon which has happened repeatedly in
history, in a greater or a lesser degree, in part or in totality. But if there is
only a mechanical imitation, if there is a subordination and servitude, the
inactive or weaker culture perishes, it is swallowed up by the invading
leviathan. And even short of that, in proportion as there is a leaning towards
these undesirable things, it languishes, is unsuccessful in its attempt at
annexation, loses besides the power of its own spirit. To recover its own
centre, find its own base and do whatever it has to do in its own strength and
genius is certainly the one way of salvation. But even then a certain amount
of acceptance, of forms too,—some imitation, if all taking over of forms must
be called imitation,—is inevitable. We have, for instance, taken over in
literature the form of the novel, the short story, the critical essay among a
number of other adoptions, in science not only the
Page 45

discoveries and inventions, but the method and instrumentation of inductive
research, in politics the press, the platform, the forms and habits of agitation,
the public association. I do not suppose that anyone seriously thinks of
renouncing or exiling these modern additions to our life,—though they are not
all of them by any means unmixed blessings,—on the ground that they are
foreign importations. But the question is what we do with them and whether
we can bring them to be instruments and by some characteristic modification
moulds of our own spirit. If so, there has been an acceptance and an
assimilation; if not there has been merely a helpless imitation.
\par But the taking over of forms is not the heart of the question. When I
speak of acceptance and assimilation, I am thinking of certain influences,
ideas, energies brought forward with a great living force by Europe, which
can awaken and enrich our own cultural activities and cultural being if we
succeed in dealing with them with a victorious power and originality, if we
can bring them into our characteristic way of being and transform them by its
shaping action. That was in fact what our own ancestors did, never losing
their originality, never effacing their uniqueness, because always vigorously
creating from within, with whatever knowledge or artistic suggestion from
outside they thought worthy of acceptance or capable of an Indian treatment.
But I would certainly repel the formula of taking the good and leaving the bad
as a crudity, one of those facile formulas which catch the superficial mind but
are unsound in conception. Obviously, if we “take over” anything, the good
and the bad in it will come in together pell-mell. If we take over for instance
that terrible, monstrous and compelling thing, that giant Asuric creation,
European industrialism,—unfortunately we are being forced by
circumstances to do it,—whether we take it in its form or its principle, we
may under more favourable conditions develop by it our wealth and economic
resources, but assuredly we shall get too its social discords and moral plagues
and cruel problems, and I do not see how we shall avoid becoming the slaves
of the economic aim in life and losing the spiritual principle of our culture.
Page 46

\par But, besides, these terms good and bad in this connection mean nothing
definite, give us no help. If I must use them, where they can have only a
relative significance, in a matter not of ethics, but of an interchange between
life and life, I must first give them this general significance that whatever
helps me to find myself more intimately, nobly, with a greater and sounder
possibility of self-expressive creation, is good; whatever carries me out of my
orientation, whatever weakens and belittles my power, richness, breadth and
height of self-being, is bad for me. If the distinction is so understood, it will be
evident, I think, to any serious and critical mind which tries to fathom things,
that the real point is not the taking over of this or that formal detail, which has
only a sign value, for example, widow remarriage, but a dealing with great
effective ideas, such as are the ideas, in the external field of life, of social and
political liberty, equality, democracy. If I accept any of these ideas it is not
because they are modern or European, which is in itself no recommendation,
but because they are human, because they present fruitful view-points to the
spirit, because they are things of the greatest importance in the future
development of the life of man. What I mean by acceptance of the effective
idea of democracy,—the thing itself, never fully worked out, was present as
an element in ancient Indian as in ancient European polity and society,—is
that I find its inclusion in our future way of living, in some shape, to be a
necessity of our growth. What I mean by assimilation, is that we must not
take it crudely in the European forms, but must go back to whatever
corresponds to it, illumines its sense, justifies its highest purport in our own
spiritual conception of life and existence, and in that light work out its extent,
degree, form, relation to other ideas, application. To everything I would apply
the same principle, to each in its own kind, after its proper dharma, in its right
measure of importance, its spiritual, intellectual, ethical, aesthetic, dynamic
utility.
\par I take it as a self-evident law of individual being applicable to
group-individuality, that it is neither desirable nor possible to exclude
everything that comes in to us from outside. I take it as an equally
self-evident law that a living organism, which
Page 47

grows not by accretion, but by self-development and assimilation, must recast
the things it takes in to suit the law and form and characteristic action of its
biological or psychological body, reject what would be deleterious or
poisonous to it,—and what is that but the non-assimilable?—take only what
can be turned into useful stuff of self-expression. It is, to use an apt
Sanskritic phrase employed in the Bengali tongue, \s{\=atmas\=at-kara\,na}, an
assimilative appropriation, a making the thing settle into oneself and turn into
characteristic form of our self-being. The impossibility of entire rejection
arises from the very fact of our being a term of diversity in a unity, not really
separate from all other existence, but in relation with all that surrounds us,
because in life this relation expresses itself very largely by a process of
interchange. The undesirability of total rejection, even if it were entirely
possible, arises from the fact that interchange with the environment is
necessary to a healthy persistence and growth; the living organism which
rejects all such interchange, would speedily languish and die of lethargy and
inanition.
\par Mentally, vitally and physically I do not grow by a pure self-development
from within in a virgin isolation; I am not a separate self-existent being
proceeding from a past to a new becoming in a world of its own where no
one is but itself, nothing works but its own inner powers and musings. There
is in every individualised existence a double action, a self-development from
within which is its greatest intimate power of being and by which it is itself,
and a reception of impacts from outside which it has to accommodate to its
own individuality and make into material of self-growth and self-power. The
two operations are not mutually exclusive, nor is the second harmful to the
first except when the inner genius is too weak to deal victoriously with its
environmental world; on the contrary the reception of impacts stimulates in a
vigorous and healthy being its force for self-development and is an aid to a
greater and more pronouncedly characteristic self-determination. As we rise
in the scale we find that the power of original development from within, of
conscious self-determination increases more and more, while in those who
live most powerfully in themselves it reaches striking,
Page 48

sometimes almost divine proportions. But at the same time we see that the
allied power of seizing upon the impacts and suggestions of the outside world
grows in proportion; those who live most powerfully in themselves, can also
most largely use the world and all its material for the Self,—and, it must be
added, most successfully help the world and enrich it out of their own being.
The man who most finds and lives from the inner self, can most embrace the
universal and become one with it; the Swarat, independent, self-possessed
and self-ruler, can most be the Samrat, possessor and shaper of the world in
which he lives, can most too grow one with all in the Atman. That is the truth
this developing existence teaches us, and it is one of the greatest secrets of
the old Indian spiritual knowledge.
\par Therefore to live in one's self, determining one's self-expression from
one's own centre of being in accordance with one's own law of being,
swadharma, is the first necessity. Not to be able to do that means
disintegration of the life; not to do it sufficiently means languor, weakness,
inefficiency, the danger of being oppressed by the environing forces and
overborne; not to be able to do it wisely, intuitively, with a strong use of one's
inner material and inner powers, means confusion, disorder and finally decline
and loss of vitality. But also not to be able to use the material that the life
around offers us, not to lay hold on it with an intuitive selection and a strong
mastering assimilation is a serious deficiency and a danger to the existence.
To a healthy individuality the external impact or entering energy, idea,
influence may act as an irritant awakening the inner being to a sense of
discord, incompatibility or peril, and then there is a struggle, an impulse and
process of rejection; but even in this struggle, in this process of rejection
there is some resultant of change and growth, some increment of the power
and material of life; the energies of the being are stimulated and helped by
the attack. It may act as a stimulus, awakening a new action of the
self-consciousness and a sense of fresh possibility,—by comparison, by
suggestion, by knocking at locked doors and arousing slumbering energies. It
may come in as a possible material which has then to be reshaped to a form
of the inner energy,
Page 49

harmonised with the inner being, reinterpreted in the light of its own
characteristic self-consciousness. In a great change of environment or a
close meeting with a mass of invading influences all these processes work
together and there is possibly much temporary perplexity and difficulty, many
doubtful and perilous movements, but also the opportunity of a great
self-developing transformation or an immense and vigorous renascence.
\par The group-soul differs from the individual only in being more
self-sufficient by reason of its being an assemblage of many individual selves
and capable within of many group variations. There is a constant inner
interchange which may for a long time suffice to maintain the vitality, growth,
power of developing activity, even when there is a restricted interchange with
the rest of humanity. Greek civilisation,—after growing under the influence of
Egyptian, Phoenician and other oriental influences,—separated itself sharply
from the non-Hellenic “barbarian” cultures and was able for some centuries
to live within itself by a rich variation and internal interchange. There was the
same phenomenon in ancient India of a culture living intensely from within in
a profound differentiation from all surrounding cultures, its vitality rendered
possible by an even greater richness of internal interchange and variation.
Chinese civilisation offers a third instance. But at no time did Indian culture
exclude altogether external influences; on the contrary a very great power of
selective assimilation, subordination and transformation of external elements
was a characteristic of its processes; it protected itself from any considerable
or overwhelming invasion, but laid hands on and included whatever struck or
impressed it and in the act of inclusion subjected it to a characteristic change
which harmonised the new element with the spirit of its own culture. But
nowadays any such strong separative aloofness as distinguished the ancient
civilisations, is no longer possible; the races of mankind have come too close
to each other, are being thrown together in a certain unavoidable life unity.
We are confronted with the more difficult problem of living in the full stress
of this greater interaction and imposing on its impacts the law of our being.
Page 50

\par Any attempt to remain exactly what we were before the European
invasion or to ignore in future the claims of a modern environment and
necessity is foredoomed to an obvious failure. However much we may
deplore some of the characteristics of that intervening period in which we
were dominated by the Western standpoint or move away from the
standpoint back to our own characteristic way of seeing existence, we cannot
get rid of a certain element of inevitable change it has produced upon us, any
more than a man can go back in life to what he was some years ago and
recover entire and unaffected a past mentality. Time and its influences have
not only passed over him, but carried him forward in their stream. We cannot
go backward to a past form of our being, but we can go forward to a large
repossession of ourselves in which we shall make a better, more living, more
real, more self-possessed use of the intervening experience. We can still
think in the essential sense of the great spirit and ideals of our past, but the
form of our thinking, our speaking, our development of them has changed by
the very fact of new thought and experience; we see them not only in the old,
but in new lights, we support them by the added strength of new view-points,
even the old words we use acquire for us a modified, more extended and
richer significance. Again, we cannot be “ourselves alone” in any narrow
formal sense, because we must necessarily take account of the modern
world around us and get full knowledge of it, otherwise we cannot live. But
all such taking account of things, all added knowledge modifies our subjective
being. My mind, with all that depends on it, is modified by what it observes
and works upon, modified when it takes in from it fresh materials of thought,
modified when it is wakened by its stimulus to new activities, modified even
when it denies and rejects; for even an old thought or truth which I affirm
against an opposing idea, becomes a new thought to me in the effort of
affirmation and rejection, clothes itself with new aspects and issues. My life
is modified in the same way by the life influences it has to encounter and
confront. Finally, we cannot avoid dealing with the great governing ideas and
problems of the modern world. The modern world is still
Page 51

mainly European, a world dominated by the European mind and Western
civilisation. We claim to set right this undue preponderance, to reassert the
Asiatic and, for ourselves, the Indian mind and to preserve and develop the
great values of Asiatic and of Indian civilisation. But the Asiatic or the Indian
mind can only assert itself successfully by meeting these problems and by
giving them a solution which will justify its own ideals and spirit.
\par The principle I have affirmed results both from the necessity of our
nature and the necessity of things, of life,—fidelity to our own spirit, nature,
ideals, the creation of our own characteristic forms in the new age and the
new environment, but also a strong and masterful dealing with external
influences which need not be and in the nature of the situation cannot be a
total rejection; therefore there must be an element of successful assimilation.
There remains the very difficult question of the application of the
principle,—the degree, the way, the guiding perceptions. To think that out we
must look at each province of culture and, keeping always firm hold on a
perception of what the Indian spirit is and the Indian ideal is, see how they
can work upon the present situation and possibilities in each of these
provinces and lead to a new victorious creation. In such thinking it will not do
to be too dogmatic. Each capable Indian mind must think it out or, better,
work it out in its own light and power,—as the Bengal artists are working it
out in their own sphere,—and contribute some illumination or effectuation.
The spirit of the Indian renascence will take care of the rest, that power of
the universal Time-Spirit which has begun to move in our midst for the
creation of a new and greater India.

\book
\par
Page 52

\ht “Is India Civilised?”

\section
\par
Page 53

\ht “Is India Civilised?”
\par\drop A book under this rather startling title was published some years
ago by Sir John Woodroffe, the well-known scholar and writer on Tantric
philosophy, in answer to an extravagant {\it jeu d'esprit} by Mr. William
Archer. That well-known dramatic critic leaving his safe natural sphere for
fields in which his chief claim to speak was a sublime and confident
ignorance, assailed the whole life and culture of India and even lumped
together all her greatest achievements, philosophy, religion, poetry, painting,
sculpture, Upanishads, Mahabharata, Ramayana in one wholesale
condemnation as a repulsive mass of unspeakable barbarism. It was argued
by many at the time that to reply to a critic of this kind was to break a
butterfly, or it might be in this instance a bumble-bee upon the wheel. But Sir
John Woodroffe insisted that even an attack of this ignorant kind ought not to
be neglected; he took it as a particularly useful type in the general kind, first,
because it raised the question from the rationalistic and not from the Christian
and missionary standpoint and, again, because it betrayed the grosser
underlying motives of all such attacks. But his book was important, not so
much as an answer to a particular critic, but because it raised with great point
and power the whole question of the survival of Indian civilisation and the
inevitability of a war of cultures.
\par The question whether there has been or is a civilisation in India is not
any longer debatable; for everyone whose opinion counts recognises the
presence of a distinct and a great civilisation unique in its character. Sir John
Woodroffe's purpose was to disclose the conflict of European and Asiatic
culture and, in greater prominence, the distinct meaning and value of Indian
civilisation, the peril it now runs and the calamity its destruction would be to
the world. The author held its preservation to be of an immense importance
to mankind and he believed it to
Page 55

be in great danger. In the stupendous rush of change which is coming on the
human world as a result of the present tornado of upheaval, ancient India's
culture, attacked by European modernism, overpowered in the material field,
betrayed by the indifference of her children, may perish for ever along with
the soul of the nation that holds it in its keeping. The book was an urgent
invitation to us to appreciate better this sacred trust and the near peril which
besets it and to stand firm and faithful in the hour of the ordeal. It will be
useful to state briefly its gist as an introduction to this all-important issue.
\par A true happiness in this world is the right terrestrial aim of man, and true
happiness lies in the finding and maintenance of a natural harmony of spirit,
mind and body. A culture is to be valued to the extent to which it has
discovered the right key of this harmony and organised its expressive motives
and movements. And a civilisation must be judged by the manner in which all
its principles, ideas, forms, ways of living work to bring that harmony out,
manage its rhythmic play and secure its continuance or the development of its
motives. A civilisation in pursuit of this aim may be predominantly material
like modern European culture, predominantly mental and intellectual like the
old Graeco-Roman or predominantly spiritual like the still persistent culture of
India. India's central conception is that of the Eternal, the Spirit here incased
in matter, involved and immanent in it and evolving on the material plane by
rebirth of the individual up the scale of being till in mental man it enters the
world of ideas and realm of conscious morality, \s{dharma}. This
achievement, this victory over unconscious matter develops its lines, enlarges
its scope, elevates its levels until the increasing manifestation of the sattwic
or spiritual portion of the vehicle of mind enables the individual mental being
in man to identify himself with the pure spiritual consciousness beyond Mind.
India's social system is built upon this conception; her philosophy formulates
it; her religion is an aspiration to the spiritual consciousness and its fruits; her
art and literature have the same upward look; her whole dharma or law of
being is founded upon it. Progress she admits, but this spiritual progress, not
the
Page 56

externally self-unfolding process of an always more and more prosperous and
efficient material civilisation. It is her founding of life upon this exalted
conception and her urge towards the spiritual and the eternal that constitute
the distinct value of her civilisation. And it is her fidelity, with whatever
human shortcomings, to this highest ideal that has made her people a nation
apart in the human world.
\par But there are other cultures led by a different conception and even an
opposite motive. And by the law of struggle which is the first law of
existence in the material universe, varying cultures are bound to come into
conflict. A deep-seated urge in Nature compels them to attempt to extend
themselves and to destroy, assimilate and replace all disparates or opposites.
Conflict is not indeed the last and ideal stage; for that comes when various
cultures develop freely, without hatred, misunderstanding or aggression and
even with an underlying sense of unity, their separate special motives. But so
long as the principle of struggle prevails, one must face the lesser law; it is
fatal to disarm in the midmost of the battle. The culture which gives up its
living separateness, the civilisation which neglects an active self-defence will
be swallowed up and the nation which lived by it will lose its soul and perish.
Each nation is a Shakti or power of the evolving spirit in humanity and lives
by the principle which it embodies. India is the Bharata Shakti, the living
energy of a great spiritual conception, and fidelity to it is the very principle of
her existence. For by its virtue alone she has been one of the immortal
nations; this alone has been the secret of her amazing persistence and
perpetual force of survival and revival.
\par The principle of struggle has assumed the large historical aspect of an
agelong clash and pressure of conflict between Asia and Europe. This clash,
this mutual pressure has had its material side, but has borne also its cultural
and spiritual aspect. Both materially and spiritually Europe has thrown herself
repeatedly upon Asia, Asia too upon Europe, to conquer, assimilate and
dominate. There has been a constant alternation, a flowing backward and
forward of these two seas of power. All Asia has always had the spiritual
tendency in more or less intensity,
Page 57

with more or less clearness; but in this essential matter India is the
quintessence of the Asiatic way of being. Europe too in mediaeval times had
a culture in which by the dominance of the Christian idea—but Christianity
was of Asiatic origin—the spiritual motive took the lead; then there was an
essential similarity as well as a certain difference. Still the differentiation of
cultural temperament has on the whole been constant. Since some centuries
Europe has become material, predatory, aggressive, and has lost the harmony
of the inner and outer man which is the true meaning of civilisation and the
efficient condition of a true progress. Material comfort, material progress,
material efficiency have become the gods of her worship. The modern
European civilisation which has invaded Asia and which all violent attacks on
Indian ideals represent, is the effective form of this materialistic culture.
India, true to her spiritual motive, has never shared in the physical attacks of
Asia upon Europe; her method has always been an infiltration of the world
with her ideas, such as we today see again in progress. But she has now
been physically occupied by Europe and this physical conquest must
necessarily be associated with an attempt at cultural conquest; that invasion
too has also made some progress. On the other hand English rule has enabled
India still to retain her identity and social type; it has awakened her to herself
and has meanwhile, until she became conscious of her strength, guarded her
against the flood which would otherwise have submerged and broken her
civilisation.
\note{This contention cannot be accepted in an unqualified sense. English
rule has by its general principle of social and religious non-interference
prevented any direct and violent touch, any deliberate and purposeful social
pressure; but it has undermined and deprived of living strength all the
preexisting centres and instruments of Indian social life and by a sort of
unperceived rodent process left it only a rotting shell without expansive
power or any better defensive force than the force of inertia.} It is for her
now to recover herself, defend her cultural existence against the alien
penetration, preserve her distinct spirit, essential principle and characteristic
forms for her own salvation and the total welfare of the human race.
\par But many questions may arise,—and principally whether
Page 58

such a spirit of defence and attack is the right spirit, whether union, harmony,
interchange are not our proper temperament for the coming human advance.
Is not a unified world-culture the large way of the future? Can either an
exaggeratedly spiritual or an excessively temporal civilisation be the sound
condition of human progress or human perfection? A happy or just
reconciliation would seem to be a better key to a harmony of Spirit, Mind and
Body. And there is the question too whether the forms of Indian culture must
be preserved intact as well as the spirit. To these queries the reply of the
author is to be found in his law of graduality of the spiritual advance of
humanity, its need of advancing through three successive stages.
\par The first stage is the period of conflict and competition which has been
ever dominant in the past and still overshadows the present of mankind. For
even when the crudest forms of material conflict are mitigated, the conflict
itself still survives and the cultural struggle comes into greater prominence.
The second step brings the stage of concert. The third and last is marked by
the spirit of sacrifice in which, because all is known as the one Self, each
gives himself for the good of others. The second stage has hardly at all
commenced for most; the third belongs to the indeterminate future.
Individuals have reached the highest stage; the perfected Sannyasin, the
liberated man, the soul that has become one with the Spirit, knows all being
as himself and for him all self-defence and attack are needless. For strife
does not belong to the law of his seeing; sacrifice and self-giving are the
whole principle of his action. But no people has reached that level, and to
follow a law or principle involuntarily or ignorantly or contrary to the truth of
one's consciousness is a falsehood and a self-destruction. To allow oneself to
be killed, like the lamb attacked by the wolf, brings no growth, farthers no
development, assures no spiritual merit. Concert or unity may come in good
time, but it must be an underlying unity with a free differentiation, not a
swallowing up of one by another or an incongruous and inharmonious
mixture. Nor can it come before the world is ready for these greater things.
To lay down one's arms in a state of war is to invite destruction and it can
serve no
Page 59

compensating spiritual purpose.
\par Spiritual and temporal have indeed to be perfectly harmonised, for the
spirit works through mind and body. But the purely intellectual or heavily
material culture of the kind that Europe now favours, bears in its heart the
seed of death; for the living aim of culture is the realisation on earth of the
kingdom of heaven. India, though its urge is towards the Eternal, since that is
always the highest, the entirely real, still contains in her own culture and her
own philosophy a supreme reconciliation of the eternal and the temporal and
she need not seek it from outside. On the same principle the form of the
interdependence of mind, body and spirit in a harmonious culture is important
as well as the pure spirit; for the form is the rhythm of the spirit. It follows
that to break up the form is to injure the spirit's self-expression or at least to
put it into grave peril. Change of forms there may and will be, but the novel
formation must be a new self-expression or self-creation developed from
within; it must be characteristic of the spirit and not servilely borrowed from
the embodiments of an alien nature.
\par Where then does India actually stand in this critical hour of her necessity
and how far can she be said to be still firmly seated on her eternal
foundations? Already she has been largely affected by European culture and
the peril is far from over; on the contrary it will be greater, more insistent,
more imperatively violent in the immediate future. Asia is rearising; but that
very fact will intensify and is already intensifying the attempt, natural and
legitimate according to the law of competition, of European civilisation to
assimilate Asia. For if she is culturally transformed and conquered, then
when she again counts in the material order of the world, it will not be with
any menace of the invasion of Europe by the Asiatic ideal. It is a cultural
quarrel complicated with a political question. Asia must become culturally a
province of Europe and form politically one part of a Europeanised if not a
European concert; otherwise Europe may become culturally a province of
Asia, Asiaticised by the dominant influence of wealthy, enormous, powerful
Asiatic peoples in the new world-system. The motive of Mr. Archer's attack
is frankly a political
Page 60

motive. This is the burden of all his song that the reconstruction of the world
must take place in the forms and follow the canons of a rationalistic and
materialistic European civilisation. On his reasoning, India if she adheres to
her own civilisation, if she cherishes its spiritual motive, if she clings to its
spiritual principle of formation, will stand out as a living denial, a hideous
“blot” upon this fair, luminous, rationalistic world. Either she must
Europeanise, rationalise, materialise her whole being and deserve liberty by
the change or else she must be kept in subjection and administered by her
cultural superiors: her people of three hundred million religious savages must
be held down firmly, taught and civilised by her noble and enlightened
Christian-atheistic European warders and tutors. A grotesque statement in
form, but in substance it has in it the root of the matter. As against the
attack—not universal, for understanding and appreciation of Indian culture
are now more common than before,—India is indeed awaking and defending
herself, but not sufficiently and not with the whole-heartedness, the clear
sight and the firm resolution which can alone save her from the peril. Today it
is close; let her choose,—for the choice is imperatively before her, to live or
to perish.
\par The warning cannot be neglected; recent utterances of European
publicists and statesmen, recent books and writings against India and the
joyful and enthusiastic welcome they have received from the public of
occidental countries, point to the reality of the danger. It arises indeed as a
necessity from the present political situation and cultural trend of humanity at
this moment of enormous decisive change. It is not necessary to follow the
writer in all the viewpoints expressed in his book. I cannot myself accept in
full his eulogy of the mediaeval civilisation of Europe. Its interest, the beauty
of its artistic motives, its deep and sincere spiritual urgings are marred for me
by its large strain of ignorance and obscurantism, its cruel intolerance, its
revolting early-Teutonic hardness, brutality, ferocity and coarseness. He
seems to me to hit a little too hard at the later European culture. This
predominantly economic type of civilisation has been ugly enough in its strain
of utilitarian materialism, which we shall
Page 61

err grossly if we imitate; still it has been uplifted by some nobler ideals that
have done much for the race. But even these are crude and imperfect in their
form and need to be spiritualised in their meaning before they can be wholly
admitted by the mind of India. I think too that the author has a little
underrated the force of the Indian revival. I do not mean its outward realised
strength, for that is very deficient, but the inevitability of its drive, its spiritual
and potential force. And he has made a little too much of the servile type of
Indian who is capable of mouthing the portentously obsequious imagination
that “European institutions are the standard by which the aspirations of India
are set.” That, except for the rapidly dwindling class to which this spokesman
belongs, has its truth now only in a single field, the political,—a very important
exception, I admit, and one which opens the door to a peril of stupendous
proportions. But even there a deep change of spirit is foreshadowed although
it has not yet taken definite form and has now to meet a fresh invasion of
furious Europeanism inspired by the militant crudeness of proletarian Russia.
Again he does not attach a sufficient importance to the increasing infiltration
of India's spiritual thought into Europe and America, which is her
characteristic retort to the European invasion. It is from this point of view
that the whole question takes on a different aspect.
\par Sir John Woodroffe invites us to a vigorous self-defence. But defence by
itself in the modern struggle can only end in defeat, and, if battle there must
be, the only sound strategy is a vigorous aggression based on a strong, living
and mobile defence; for by that aggressive force alone can the defence itself
be effective. Why are a certain class of Indians still hypnotised in all fields by
European culture and why are we all still hypnotised by it in the field of
politics? Because they constantly saw all the power, creation, activity on the
side of Europe, all the immobility or weakness of a static inefficient defence
on the side of India. But wherever the Indian spirit has been able to react, to
attack with energy and to create with \'eclat, the European glamour has begun
immediately to lose its hypnotic power. No one now feels the weight of the
religious assault from Europe
Page 62

which was very powerful at the outset, because the creative activities of the
Hindu revival have made Indian religion a living and evolving, a secure,
triumphant and self-assertive power. But the seal was put to this work by
two events, the Theosophical movement and the appearance of Swami
Vivekananda at Chicago. For these two things showed the spiritual ideas for
which India stands no longer on their defence but aggressive and invading the
materialised mentality of the Occident. All India had been vulgarised and
anglicised in its aesthetic notions by English education and influence, until the
brilliant and sudden dawn of the Bengal school of art cast its rays so far as to
be seen in Tokio, London and Paris. That significant cultural event has
already effected an aesthetic revolution in the country, not yet by any means
complete, but irresistible and sure of the future. The same phenomenon
extends to other fields. Even in the province of politics that was the internal
sense of the policy of the so-called extremist party in the Swadeshi
movement; for it was a movement which attempted to override the previous
apparent impossibility of political creation by the Indian spirit upon other than
imitative European lines. If it failed for the time being, not by any falsity in its
inspiration, but by the strength of a hostile pressure and the weakness still left
by a past decadence, if its incipient creations were broken or left languishing
and deprived of their original significance, yet it will remain as a finger-post
on the roads. The attempt is bound to be renewed as soon as a wider gate is
opened under more favourable conditions. Till that attempt comes and
succeeds, a serious danger besets the soul of India; for a political
Europeanisation would be followed by a social turn of the same kind and
bring a cultural and spiritual death in its train. Aggression must be successful
and creative if the defence is to be effective.
\par This great question must be given its larger world-wide import if we are
to see it in its true lines. The principle of struggle, conflict and competition still
governs and for some time will still govern international relations; for even if
war is abolished in the near future by some as yet improbable good fortune of
the race, conflict will take other forms. At the same time a certain growing
Page 63

mutual closeness of the life of humanity is the most prominent phenomenon
of the day. The War has brought it into violent relief; but the after-war is
bringing out all its implications as well as the mass of its difficulties. This is as
yet no real concert, still less the beginning of a true unity, but only a
compelling physical oneness forced on us by scientific inventions and modern
circumstances. But this physical oneness must necessarily bring its mental,
cultural and psychological results. At first it will probably accentuate rather
than diminish conflict in many directions, enhance political and economic
struggles of many kinds and hasten too a cultural struggle. There it may bring
about in the end a swallowing unification and a destruction of all other
civilisations by one aggressive European type: whether that type will be
bourgeois economical or labour materialistic or a rationalistic intellectualism
cannot easily be foreseen, but at present in one form or another this is the
actuality that is most in the front. On the other hand it may lead to a free
concert with some underlying oneness. But the ideal of the entire
separateness of the peoples each developing its sharply separatist culture
with an alien exclusion law for other leading ideas and cultural forms,
although it has been for some time abroad and was growing in vigour, is not
likely to prevail. For that to happen the whole aim of unification preparing in
Nature must fall to pieces, an improbable but not quite impossible
catastrophe. Europe dominates the world and it is natural to forecast a
Westernised world with such petty differences as might be permissible in a
European unity given up to the rigorous scientific pursuit of the development
and organisation of material life. Across this possibility falls the shadow of
India.
\par Sir John Woodroffe quotes the dictum of Professor Lowes Dickinson
that the opposition is not so much between Asia and Europe as between India
and the rest of the world. There is a truth behind that dictum; but the cultural
opposition of Europe and Asia remains an unabolished factor. Spirituality is
not the monopoly of India; however it may hide submerged in intellectualism
or hid in other concealing veils, it is a necessary part of human nature. But
the difference is between spirituality made the
Page 64

leading motive and the determining power of both the inner and the outer life
and spirituality suppressed, allowed only under disguises or brought in as a
minor power, its reign denied or put off in favour of the intellect or of a
dominant materialistic vitalism. The former way was the type of the ancient
wisdom at one time universal in all civilised countries—literally, from China to
Peru. But all other nations have fallen away from it and diminished its large
pervasiveness or fallen away from it altogether as in Europe. Or they are
now, as in Asia, in danger of abandoning it for the invading economic,
commercial, industrial, intellectually utilitarian modern type. India alone, with
whatever fall or decline of light and vigour, has remained faithful to the heart
of the spiritual motive. India alone is still obstinately recalcitrant; for Turkey
and China and Japan, say her critics, have outgrown that foolishness, by
which it is meant that they have grown rationalistic and materialistic. India
alone as a nation, whatever individuals or a small class may have done, has
till now refused to give up her worshipped Godhead or bow her knee to the
strong reigning idols of rationalism, commercialism and economism, the
successful iron gods of the West. Affected she has been, but not yet
overcome. Her surface mind rather than her deeper intelligence has been
obliged to admit many Western ideas, liberty, equality, democracy and others,
and to reconcile them with her Vedantic Truth; but she has not been
altogether at ease with them in the Western form and she seeks about
already in her thought to give to them an Indian which cannot fail to be a
spiritualised turn. The first passion to imitate English ideas and culture has
passed; but another more dangerous has recently taken its place, the passion
to imitate continental European culture at large and in particular the crude
and vehement turn of revolutionary Russia. On the other hand one sees a
growing revival of this ancient Hindu religion and the immense sweep of a
spiritual awakening and its significant movements. And out of this ambiguous
situation there can be only one out of two issues. Either India will be
rationalised and industrialised out of all recognition and she will be no longer
India or else she will be the leader in a new world-phase, aid by her example
and cultural
Page 65

infiltration the new tendencies of the West and spiritualise the human race.
That is the one radical and poignant question at issue. Will the spiritual motive
which India represents prevail on Europe and create there new forms
congenial to the West, or will European rationalism and commercialism put an
end for ever to the Indian type of culture?
\par Not, then, whether India is civilised is the query that should be put, but
whether the motive which has shaped her civilisation or the old-European
intellectual or the new-European materialistic motive is to lead human culture.
Is the harmony of the spirit, mind and body to found itself on the gross law of
our physical nature, rationalised only or touched at the most by an ineffective
spiritual glimmer, or is the dominant power of spirit to take the lead and force
the lesser powers of the intellect, mind and body to a more exalted effort
after a highest harmony, a victorious ever-developing equipoise? India must
defend herself by reshaping her cultural forms to express more powerfully,
intimately and perfectly her ancient ideal. Her aggression must lead the
waves of the light thus liberated in triumphant self-expanding rounds all over
the world which it once possessed or at least enlightened in far-off ages. An
appearance of conflict must be admitted for a time, for as long as the attack
of an opposite culture continues. But since it will be in effect an assistance to
all the best that is emerging from the advanced thought of the Occident, it will
culminate in the beginning of concert on a higher plane and a preparation of
oneness.
Page 66

\par
\ht “Is India Civilised?”–2
\par\drop This question of Indian civilisation, once it has raised this greater
issue, shifts from its narrow meaning and disappears into a much larger
problem. Does the future of humanity lie in a culture founded solely upon
reason and science? Is the progress of human life the effort of a mind, a
continuous collective mind constituted by an ever changing sum of transient
individuals, that has emerged from the darkness of the inconscient material
universe and is stumbling about in it in search of some clear light and some
sure support amid its difficulties and problems? And does civilisation consist
in man's endeavour to find that light and support in a rationalised knowledge
and a rationalised way of life? An ordered knowledge of the powers, forces,
possibilities of physical Nature and of the psychology of man as a mental and
physical being is then the only true science. An ordered use of that
knowledge for a progressive social efficiency and well-being, which will
make his brief existence more efficient, more tolerable, more comfortable,
happier, better appointed, more luxuriously enriched with the pleasures of the
mind, life and body, is the only true art of life. All our philosophy, all our
religion,—supposing religion has not been outgrown and rejected,—all our
science, thought, art, social structure, law and institution must found itself
upon this idea of existence and must serve this one aim and endeavour. This
is the formula which European civilisation has accepted and is still labouring
to bring into some kind of realisation. It is the formula of an intelligently
mechanised civilisation supporting a rational and utilitarian culture.
\par Or is not the truth of our being rather that of a Soul embodied in Nature
which is seeking to know itself, to find itself, to enlarge its consciousness, to
arrive at a greater way of existence, to progress in the spirit and grow into
the full light of self-
Page 67

knowledge and some divine inner perfection? Are not religion, philosophy,
science, thought, art, society, all life even means only of this growth,
instruments of the spirit to be used for its service and with this spiritual aim as
their dominant or at least their ultimate preoccupation? That is the idea of life
and being,—the knowledge of it, as she claims,—for which India stood till
yesterday and still strives to stand with all that is most persistent and
powerful in her nature. It is the formula of a spiritualised civilisation striving
through the perfection but also through an exceeding of mind, life and body
towards a high soul-culture.
\par Whether the future hope of the race lies in a rational and an intelligently
mechanised or in a spiritual, intuitive and religious civilisation and
culture,—that, then, is the important issue. When the rationalist critic denies
that India is or ever has been civilised, when he declares the Upanishads, the
Vedanta, Buddhism, Hinduism, ancient Indian art and poetry a mass of
barbarism, the vain production of a persistently barbaric mind, what he means
is simply that civilisation is synonymous and identical with the cult and
practice of the materialistic reason and that anything which falls below or
goes above that standard does not deserve the name. A too metaphysical
philosophy, a too religious religion,—if not indeed all philosophy and all
religion,—any too idealistic and all mystic thought and art and every kind of
occult knowledge, all that refines and probes beyond the limited purview of
the reason dealing with the physical universe and seems therefore to it
bizarre, over-subtle, excessive, unintelligible, all that responds to the sense of
the Infinite, all that is obsessed with the idea of the eternal, and a society
which is too much governed by ideas born of these things and not solely by
intellectual clarity and the pursuit of a material development and efficiency,
are not the products of civilisation, but the offspring of a crudely subtle
barbarism. But this thesis obviously proves too much; most of the great past
of humanity would fall under its condemnation. Even ancient Greek culture
would not escape it; much of the thought and art of modern European
civilisation itself would in that case have to be damned as at least
semi-barbarous. Evidently, we cannot without falling
Page 68

into exaggeration and absurdity narrow the sense of the word and impoverish
the significance of the past strivings of the race. Indian civilisation in the past
has been and must be recognised as the fruit of a great culture, quite as much
as the Graeco-Roman, the Christian, the Islamic or the later Renaissance
civilisation of Europe.
\par But the essential question remains open; the dispute is only narrowed to
its central issue. A more moderate and perspicacious rationalistic critic would
admit the past value of India's achievements. He would not condemn
Buddhism and Vedanta and all Indian art and philosophy and social ideas as
barbarous, but he would still contend that not there lies any future good for
the human race. The true line of advance lies through European modernism,
the mighty works of Science and the great modern adventure of humanity, its
effort well founded not upon speculation and imagination but on ascertained
and tangible scientific truth, its laboriously increased riches of sure and firmly
tested scientific organisation. An Indian mind faithful to its ideals would
contend on the contrary that while reason and science and all other auxiliaries
have their place in the human effort, the real truth goes beyond them. The
secret of our ultimate perfection is to be discovered deeper within us and
things and Nature; it is to be sought centrally in spiritual self-knowledge and
self-perfection and in the founding of life on that self-knowledge.
\par When the issue is so stated, we can at once see that the gulf between
East and West, India and Europe is much less profound and unbridgeable
now than it was thirty or forty years ago. The basic difference still remains;
the life of the West is still chiefly governed by the rationalistic idea and a
materialistic preoccupation. But at the summits of thought and steadily
penetrating more and more downward through art and poetry and music and
general literature an immense change is in progress. A reaching towards
deeper things, an increasing return of seekings which had been banished, an
urge towards higher experience yet unrealised, an admission of ideas long
foreign to the Western mentality can be seen everywhere. Aiding this
process and aided by it there has been a certain infiltration of Indian and
Eastern
Page 69

thought and influence; even here and there we find some growing recognition
of the high value or the superior greatness of the ancient spiritual ideal. This
infiltration began at a very early stage of the near contact between the
farther Orient and Europe of which the English occupation of India was the
most direct occasion. But at first it was a slight and superficial touch, at most
an intellectual influence on a few superior minds. An academic interest or an
attracted turn of scholars and thinkers towards Vedanta, Sankhya, Buddhism,
admiration for the subtlety and largeness of Indian philosophic idealism, the
stamp left by the Upanishads and the Gita on great intellects like
Schopenhauer and Emerson and on a few lesser thinkers, this was the first
narrow inlet of the floods. The impression did not go very far at the best and
the little effect it might have produced was counteracted and even effaced
for a time by the great flood of scientific materialism which submerged the
whole life-view of later nineteenth-century Europe.
\par But now other movements have arisen and laid hold on thought and life
with a triumphant success. Philosophy and thought have taken a sharp curve
away from rationalistic materialism and its confident absolutisms. On the one
hand, as a first consequence of the seeking for a larger thought and vision of
the universe, Indian Monism has taken a subtle but powerful hold on many
minds, though often in strange disguises. On the other hand new philosophies
have been born, not indeed directly spiritual, vitalistic rather and pragmatic,
but yet by their greater subjectivity already nearer to Indian ways of thinking.
The old limits of scientific interest have begun to break down; various forms
of psychical research and novel departures in psychology and even an
interest in psychism and occultism, have come into increasing vogue and
fasten more and more their hold in spite of the anathemas of orthodox religion
and orthodox science. Theosophy with its comprehensive combinations of old
and new beliefs and its appeal to ancient spiritual and psychic systems, has
everywhere exercised an influence far beyond the circle of its professed
adherents. Opposed for a long time with obloquy and ridicule, it has done
much to spread the belief in Karma,
Page 70

reincarnation, other planes of existence, the evolution of the embodied soul
through intellect and psyche to spirit, ideas which once accepted must change
the whole attitude towards life. Even Science itself is constantly arriving at
conclusions which only repeat upon the physical plane and in its language
truths which ancient India had already affirmed from the standpoint of
spiritual knowledge in the tongue of the Veda and Vedanta. Every one of
these advances leads directly or in its intrinsic meaning towards a nearer
approach between the mind of East and West and to that extent to a
likelihood of a better understanding of Indian thought and ideals.
\par In some directions the change of attitude has gone remarkably far and
seems to be constantly increasing. A Christian missionary quoted by Sir John
Woodroffe is “amazed to find the extent to which Hindu Pantheism has
begun to permeate the religious conceptions of Germany, of America, even
of England” and he considers its cumulative effect an imminent “danger” to
the next generation. Another writer cited by him goes so far as to attribute all
the highest philosophical thought of Europe to the previous thinking of the
Brahmins and affirms even that all modern solutions of intellectual problems
will be found anticipated in the East. A distinguished French psychologist
recently told an Indian visitor that India had already laid down all the large
lines and main truths, the broad schema, of a genuine psychology and all that
Europe can now do is to fill them in with exact details and scientific
verifications. These utterances are the extreme indications of a growing
change of which the drift is unmistakable.
\par Nor is it only in philosophy and the higher thinking that this turn is visible.
European art has moved in certain directions far away from its old moorings;
it is developing a new eye and opening in its own manner to motives which
until now were held in honour only in the East. Eastern art and decoration
have begun to be widely appreciated and have exercised a strong if subtle
influence. Poetry has for some time commenced to speak uncertainly a new
language,—note that the world-wide fame of Tagore would have been
unthinkable thirty years ago,—and
Page 71

one often finds the verse even of ordinary writers teeming with thoughts and
expressions which could formerly have found few parallels outside Indian,
Buddhistic and Sufi poems. And there are some first preliminary signs of a
similar phenomenon in general literature. More and more the seekers of new
truth are finding their spiritual home in India or owe to her much of their
inspiration or at least acknowledge her light and undergo her influence. If this
turn continues to accentuate its drive, and there is little chance of a reversion,
the spiritual and intellectual gulf between East and West if not filled up, will at
least be bridged and the defence of Indian culture and ideals will stand in a
stronger position.
\par But then, it may be said, if there is this certainty of an approximative
understanding, what is the need of an aggressive defence of Indian culture or
of any defence at all? Indeed, what is the need for the continuance of any
distinctive Indian civilisation in the future? East and West will meet from two
opposite sides and merge in each other and found in the life of a unified
humanity a common world-culture. All previous or existing forms, systems,
variations will fuse in this new amalgam and find their fulfilment. But the
problem is not so easy, not so harmoniously simple. For, even if we could
assume that in a united world-culture there would be no spiritual need and no
vital utility for strong distinctive variations, we are still very far from any such
oneness. The subjective and spiritual turn of the more advanced modern
thought is still confined to a minority and has only very superficially coloured
the general intelligence of Europe. Moreover, it is a movement of the thought
only; the great life-motives of European civilisation stand as yet where they
were. There is a greater pressure of certain idealistic elements in the
proposed reshaping of human relations, but they have not shaken off or even
loosened the yoke of the immediate materialistic past. It is precisely at this
critical moment and in these conditions that the whole human world, India
included, is about to be forced into the stress and travail of a swift
transformation. The danger is that the pressure of dominant European ideas
and motives, the temptations of the political needs of the hour, the velocity
Page 72

of rapid inevitable change will leave no time for the growth of sound thought
and spiritual reflection and may strain to bursting-point the old Indian cultural
and social system, and shatter this ancient civilisation before India has had
time to readjust her mental stand and outlook or to reject, remould or replace
the forms that can no longer meet her environmental national necessities,
create new characteristic powers and figures and find a firm basis for a swift
evolution in the sense of her own spirit and ideals. In that event a rationalised
and Westernised India, a brown ape of Europe, might emerge from the
chaos, keeping some elements only of her ancient thought to modify, but no
longer to shape and govern her total existence. Like other countries she
would have passed into the mould of occidental modernism; ancient India
would have perished.
\par Certain minds would see in this contingency no disaster, but rather a
most desirable turn and a happy event. It would mean, in their view, that
India had given up her spiritual separation and undergone the much needed
intellectual and moral change that would at last entitle her to enter into the
comity of modern peoples. And since in the new world-comity there would
enter an increasing spiritual and subjective element and much perhaps of
India's own religious and philosophical thought would be appropriated by its
culture, the disappearance of her antique spirit and personal self-expression
need be no absolute loss. Ancient India would have passed like ancient
Greece, leaving its contribution to a new and more largely progressive life of
the race. But the absorption of the Graeco-Roman culture by the later
European world, even though many of its elements still survive in a larger and
more complex civilisation, was yet attended with serious diminutions. There
was a deplorable loss of its high and clear intellectual order, a still more
calamitous perdition of the ancient cult of beauty, and even now after so
many centuries there has been no true recovery of the lost spirit. A much
greater diminution of the world's riches would result from the disappearance
of a distinctive Indian civilisation, because the difference between its
standpoint and that of European modernism is deeper, its spirit unique and the
rich mass and diversity of its thousand
Page 73

lines of inner experience a heritage that still India alone can preserve in its
intricate truth and dynamic order.
\par The tendency of the normal Western mind is to live from below upward
and from out inward. A strong foundation is taken in the vital and material
nature and higher powers are invoked and admitted only to modify and
partially uplift the natural terrestrial life. The inner existence is formed and
governed by the external powers. India's constant aim has been on the
contrary to find a basis of living in the higher spiritual truth and to live from
the inner spirit outwards, to exceed the present way of mind, life and body, to
command and dictate to external Nature. As the old Vedic seers put it,
“Their divine foundation was above even while they stood below; let its rays
be settled deep within us,” \s{n\=ic\=in\=a\,h sthur upari budhna e\,s\=am}, \s{asme
antar nihit\=a\,h ketava\,h syu\,h}. Now that difference is no unimportant subtlety,
but of a great and penetrating practical consequence. And we can see how
Europe would deal with any spiritual influence by her treatment of
Christianity and its inner rule which she never really accepted as the law of
her life. It was admitted but only as an ideal and emotional influence and used
only to chasten and give some spiritual colouring to the vital vigour of the
Teuton and the intellectual clarity and sensuous refinement of the Latins. Any
new spiritual development she might accept would be taken in the same way
and used to a like limited and superficial purpose, if an insistent living culture
were not there in the world to challenge this lesser ideal and insist on the true
life of the spirit.
\par It may well be that both tendencies, the mental and the vital and physical
stress of Europe and the spiritual and psychic impulse of India, are needed
for the completeness of the human movement. But if the spiritual ideal points
the final way to a triumphant harmony of manifested life, then it is
all-important for India not to lose hold of the truth, not to give up the highest
she knows and barter it away for a perhaps more readily practicable but still
lower ideal alien to her true and constant nature. It is important too for
humanity that a great collective effort to realise this highest ideal—however
imperfect it may have been,
Page 74

into whatever confusion and degeneration it may temporarily have
fallen,—should not cease, but continue. Always it can recover its force and
enlarge its expression; for the spirit is not bound to temporal forms but
ever-new, immortal and infinite. A new creation of the old Indian
\s{svadharma}, not a transmutation to some law of the Western nature, is our
best way to serve and increase the sum of human progress.
\par There arises the necessity of a defence and a strong, even an aggressive
defence; for only an aggressive defence can be effective in the conditions of
the modern struggle. But here we find ourselves brought up against an
opposite turn of mind and its stark obstructive temper. For there are plenty of
Indians now who are for a stubbornly static defence, and whatever
aggressiveness they put into it consists in a rather vulgar and unthinking
cultural Chauvinism which holds that whatever we have is good for us
because it is Indian or even that whatever is in India is best, because it is the
creation of the Rishis. As if all the later clumsy and chaotic developments
were laid down by those much misused, much misapplied and often very
much forged founders of our culture. But the question is whether a static
defence is of any effective value. I hold that it is of no value, because it is
inconsistent with the truth of things and doomed to failure. It amounts to an
attempt to sit stubbornly still while the Shakti of the world is rapidly moving
on her way, and not only the Shakti of the world but the Shakti in India also.
It is a determination to live only on our past cultural capital, to eke it out, small
as it has grown in our wasteful and incompetent hands, to the last anna: but to
live on our capital without using it for fresh gains is to end in bankruptcy and
pauperism. The past has to be used and spent as mobile and current capital
for some larger profit, acquisition and development of the future: but to gain
we must release, we must part with something in order to grow and live more
richly,—that is the universal law of existence. Otherwise the life within us
will stagnate and perish in its immobile torpor. Thus to shrink from
enlargement and change is too a false confession of impotence. It is to hold
that India's creative capacity in religion and in philosophy came to
Page 75

an end with Shankara, Ramanuja, Madhwa and Chaitanya and in social
construction with Raghunandan and Vidyaranya. It is to rest in art and poetry
either in a blank and uncreative void or in a vain and lifeless repetition of
beautiful but spent forms and motives. It is to cling to social forms that are
crumbling and will continue to crumble in spite of our efforts and risk to be
crushed in their collapse.
\par The objection to any large change—for a large and bold change is
needed and no peddling will serve our purpose—can be given a plausible turn
only if we rest it on the contention that the forms of a culture are the right
rhythm of its spirit and in breaking the rhythm we may expel the spirit and
dissipate the harmony for ever. Yes, but though the Spirit is eternal in its
essence and in the fundamental principles of its harmony immutable, the
actual rhythm of its self-expression in form is ever mutable. Immutable in its
being and in the powers of its being but richly mutable in life, that is the very
nature of the spirit's manifested existence. And we have to see too whether
the actual rhythm of the moment is still a harmony or whether it has not
become in the hands of an inferior and ignorant orchestra a discord and no
longer expresses rightly or sufficiently the ancient spirit. To recognise defect
in the form is not to deny the inherent spirit; it is rather the condition for
moving onward to a greater future amplitude, a more perfect realisation, a
happier outflow of the Truth we harbour. Whether we shall actually find a
greater expression than the past gave us, depends on our own selves, on our
capacity of response to the eternal Power and Wisdom and the illumination of
the Shakti within us and on our skill in works, the skill that comes by unity
with the eternal spirit we are in the measure of our light labouring to express;
\s{yoga\,h karmasu kau\'salam}.
\par This from the standpoint of Indian culture, and that must be always for
us the first consideration and the intrinsic standpoint. But there is also the
standpoint of the pressure of the Time Spirit upon us. For this too is the action
of the universal Shakti and cannot be ignored, held at arm's length or
forbidden entrance. Here too the policy of new creation imposes itself as the
true and only effective way. Even if to stand still and stiff within our
Page 76

well-defended gates were desirable, it is no longer possible. We can no
longer take our single station apart in humanity, isolated like a solitary island
in the desert ocean, neither going forth nor allowing to enter in,—if indeed we
ever did it. For good or for ill the world is with us; the flood of modern ideas
and forces are pouring in and will take no denial. There are two ways of
meeting them, either to offer a forlorn and hopeless resistance or to seize and
subjugate them. If we offer only an inert or stubborn passive resistance, they
will still come in on us, break down our defences where they are weakest,
sap them where they are stiffer, and where they can do neither, steal in
unknown or ill-apprehended by underground mine and tunnel. Entering
unassimilated they will act as disruptive forces, and it will be only partly by
outward attack, but much more by an inward explosion that this ancient
Indian civilisation will be shattered to pieces. Ominous sparks are already
beginning to run about which nobody knows how to extinguish, and if we
could extinguish them, we should be no better off, for we should yet have to
deal with the source from which they are starting. Even the most rigid
defenders of the present in the name of the past show in their every word
how strongly they have been affected by new ways of thinking. Many if not
most are calling passionately, calling inevitably for innovations in certain
fields, changes European in spirit and method which, once admitted without
some radical assimilation and Indianisation, will end by breaking up the whole
social structure they think they are defending. That arises from confusion of
thought and an incapacity of power. Because we are unable to think and
create in certain fields, we are obliged to borrow without assimilation or with
only an illusory pretence of assimilation. Because we cannot see the whole
sense of what we are doing from a high inner and commanding point of
vision, we are busy bringing together disparates without any saving
reconciliation. A slow combustion and swift explosion are likely to be the end
of our efforts.
\par Aggressive defence implies a new creation from this inner and
commanding vision and while it demands a bringing of what we have to a
more expressive force of form, it must allow also
Page 77

an effective assimilation of whatever is useful to our new life and can be
made harmonious with our spirit. Battle, shock and struggle themselves are
no vain destruction; they are a violent cover for Time's great interchanges.
Even the most successful victor receives much from the vanquished and if
sometimes he appropriates it, as often it takes him prisoner. The Western
attack is not confined to a breaking down of the forms of Eastern culture;
there is at the same time a large, subtle and silent appropriation of much that
is valuable in the East for the enrichment of occidental culture. Therefore to
bring forward the glories of our past and scatter on Europe and America as
much of its treasures as they will receive, will not save us. That liberality will
enrich and strengthen our cultural assailants, but for us it will only serve to
give a self-confidence which will be useless and even misleading if it is not
made a force of will for a greater creation. What we have to do is to front
the attack with new and more powerful formations which will not only throw
it back, but even, where that is possible and helpful to the race, carry the war
into the assailant's country. At the same time we must take by a strong
creative assimilation whatever answers to our own needs and responds to the
Indian spirit. In certain directions, as yet all too few, we have begun both
these movements. In others we have simply created an unintelligent mixture
or else have taken and are still taking over rash, crude and undigested
borrowings. Imitation, a rough and haphazard borrowing of the assailant's
engines and methods may be temporarily useful, but by itself it is only another
way of submitting to conquest. A stark appropriation is not sufficient;
successful assimilation to the Indian spirit is the needed movement. The
problem is one of immense difficulty and stupendous in its proportions and we
have not yet approached it with wisdom and insight. All the more pressing is
the need to awaken to the situation and meet it with original thinking and a
conscious action wise and powerful in insight and sure in process. A
mastering and helpful assimilation of new stuff into an eternal body has
always been in the past a peculiar power of the genius of India.
Page 78

\par
\ht “Is India Civilised?”–3
\par\drop But there is yet another point of view from which the challenge put
in front of us ceases to be an issue crudely and provokingly phrased in a
conflict of cultures. Instead it presents itself as a problem with a deep
significance; it becomes a thought-provoking suggestion that affects not only
ours but all civilisations still in existence.
\par We can reply on the cultural issue from the view-point of the past and
the valuation of different cultures as acquired contributions to the growth of
the human race, that Indian civilisation has been the form and expression of a
culture as great as any of the historic civilisations of mankind, great in
religion, great in philosophy, great in science, great in thought of many kinds,
great in literature, art and poetry, great in the organisation of society and
politics, great in craft and trade and commerce. There have been dark spots,
positive imperfections, heavy shortcomings; what civilisation has been
perfect, which has not had its deep stains and cruel abysses? There have
been considerable lacunae, many blind alleys, much uncultured or ill-cultured
ground: what civilisation has been without its unfilled parts, its negative
aspects? But our ancient civilisation can survive the severest comparisons of
either ancient or mediaeval times. More high-reaching, subtle, many-sided,
curious and profound than the Greek, more noble and humane than the
Roman, more large and spiritual than the old Egyptian, more vast and original
than any other Asiatic civilisation, more intellectual than the European prior to
the eighteenth century, possessing all that these had and more, it was the
most powerful, self-possessed, stimulating and wide in influence of all past
human cultures.
\par And if we look from the view-point of the present and the fruitful
workings of the progressive Time-Spirit, we can say that
Page 79

even here in spite of our downfall all is not on the debit side. Many of the
forms of our civilisation have become inapt and effete and others stand in
need of radical change and renovation. But that can be said equally well of
European culture; for all its recently acquired progressiveness and habit of
more rapid self-adaptation, large parts of it are already rotten and out of date.
In spite of all drawbacks and in spite of downfall the spirit of Indian culture,
its central ideas, its best ideals have still their message for humanity and not
for India alone. And we in India hold that they are capable of developing out
of themselves by contact with new need and idea as good and better
solutions of the problems before us than those which are offered to us
secondhand from Western sources. But besides the comparisons of the past
and the needs of the present there is too a view-point of the ideal future.
There are the farther goals towards which humanity is moving,—and the
present is only a crude aspiration towards them and the immediate future we
now see in hope and strive to bring about in form, only its crude preparatory
stage. There is an unrealised standard of the ideas which to the mind of the
moment are figments of Utopia, but may become to a more developed
humanity the commonplaces of their daily environment, the familiar things of
the present which they have to overpass. How stands Indian civilisation with
regard to this yet unrealised future of the race? Are its master ideas and
dominant powers guiding lights or helping forces towards it or do they end in
themselves with no vistas on the evolutionary potentialities of the earth's
coming ages?
\par The very idea of progress is an illusion to some minds; for they imagine
that the race moves constantly in a circle. Or even their view is that
greatness more often than not is to be found in the past and that the line of
our movement is a curve of deterioration, a downward lapse. But that is an
illusion created when we look too much upon the highlights of the past and
forget its shadows or concentrate too much on the dark spaces of the present
and ignore its powers of light and its aspects of happier promise. It is created
too by a mistaken deduction from the phenomenon of an uneven progress.
For Nature effects her
Page 80

evolution through a rhythm of advance and relapse, day and night, waking
and sleep; there is a temporary pushing of certain results at the expense of
others not less desirable for perfection and to a superficial eye there may
seem to be a relapse even in our advance. Progress admittedly does not
march on securely in a straight line like a man sure of his familiar way or an
army covering an unimpeded terrain or well-mapped unoccupied spaces.
Human progress is very much an adventure through the unknown, an
unknown full of surprises and baffling obstacles; it stumbles often, it misses
its way at many points, it cedes here in order to gain there, it retraces its
steps frequently in order to get more widely forward. The present does not
always compare favourably with the past; even when it is more advanced in
the mass, it may still be inferior in certain directions important to our inner or
our outer welfare. But earth does move forward after all, {\it eppur si
muove}. Even in failure there is a preparation for success: our nights carry in
them the secret of a greater dawn. This is a frequent experience in our
individual progress, but the human collectivity also moves in much the same
manner. The question is whither are we marching or what are the true routes
and harbours of our voyage.
\par Western civilisation is proud of its successful modernism. But there is
much that it has lost in the eagerness of its gains and much which men of old
strove towards that it has not even attempted to accomplish. There is much
too that it has wilfully flung aside in impatience or scorn to its own great loss,
to the injury of its life, to the imperfection of its culture. An ancient Greek of
the time of Pericles or the philosophers suddenly transported in time to this
century would be astonished by the immense gains of the intellect and the
expansion of the mind, the modern many-sidedness of the reason and
inexhaustible habit of inquiry, the power of endless generalisation and precise
detail. He would admire without reserve the miraculous growth of science
and its giant discoveries, the abundant power, richness and minuteness of its
instrumentation, the wonder-working force of its inventive genius. He would
be overcome and stupefied rather than surprised and charmed by the
enormous stir and
Page 81

pulsation of modern life. But at the same time he would draw back repelled
from its unashamed mass of ugliness and vulgarity, its unchastened external
utilitarianism, its vitalistic riot and the morbid exaggeration and unsoundness
of many of its growths. He would see in it much ill-disguised evidence of the
uneliminated survival of the triumphant barbarian. If he recognised its
intellectuality and the scrupulous application of thought and scientific reason
to the machinery of life, he would miss in it his own later attempt at the clear
and noble application of the ideal reason to the inner life of the mind and the
soul. He would find that in this civilisation beauty had become an exotic and
the shining ideal mind in some fields a debased and exploited slave and in
others a neglected stranger. As for the great spiritual seekers of the past,
they would experience in all this huge activity of the intellect and the life the
sense of an aching void. A feeling of its illusion and unreality because that
which is greatest in man and raises him beyond himself had been neglected,
would oppress them at every step. The discovery of the laws of physical
Nature would not compensate in their eyes for the comparative decline—for
a long time it was the almost absolute cessation—of a greater seeking and
finding, the discovery of the freedom of the spirit.
\par But an unbiassed view will prefer to regard this age of civilisation as an
evolutionary stage, an imperfect but important turn of the human advance. It
is then possible to see that great gains have been made which are of the
utmost value to an ultimate perfection, even if they have been made at a
great price. There is not only a greater generalisation of knowledge and more
thorough use of intellectual power and activity in multiple fields. There is not
only the advance of Science and its application to the conquest of our
environment, an immense apparatus of means, vast utilisations, endless
minute conveniences, an irresistible machinery, a tireless exploitation of
forces. There is too a certain development of powerful if not high-pitched
ideals and there is an attempt, however external and therefore imperfect, to
bring them to bear upon the working of human society as a whole. Much has
been diminished or lost, but it
Page 82

can be recovered, eventually, if not with ease. Once restored to its true
movement, the inner life of man will find that it has gained in materials, in
power of plasticity, in a new kind of depth and wideness. And we shall have
acquired a salutary habit of many-sided thoroughness and a sincere
endeavour to shape the outer collective life into an adequate image of our
highest ideals. Temporary diminutions will not count before the greater inner
expansion that is likely to succeed this age of external turmoil and
outward-looking endeavour.
\par If on the other hand an ancient Indian of the time of the Upanishads, the
Buddhist period or the later classical age were to be set down in modern
India and note that larger part of its life which belongs to the age of decline,
he would experience a much more depressing sensation, the sense of a
national, a cultural debacle, a fall from the highest summits to discouragingly
low levels. He might well ask himself what this degenerate posterity had
done with the mighty civilisation of the past. He would wonder how with so
much to inspire, to elevate, to spur them to yet greater accomplishment and
self-exceeding, they could have lapsed into this impotent and inert confusion
and, instead of developing the high motives of Indian culture to yet deeper
and wider issues, allowed them to overload themselves with ugly accretions,
to rust, to rot, almost to perish. He would see his race clinging to forms and
shells and rags of the past and missing nine-tenths of its nobler values. He
would compare the spiritual light and energy of the heroic ages of the
Upanishads and the philosophies with the later inertia or small and broken
fragmentarily derivative activity of our philosophic thought. After the
intellectual curiosity, the scientific development, the creative literary and
artistic greatness, the noble fecundity of the classical age he would be
amazed by the extent of a later degeneracy, its mental poverty, immobility,
static repetition, the comparative feebleness of the creative intuition, the long
sterility of art, the cessation of science. He would deplore a prone descent to
ignorance, a failing of the old powerful will and tapasya, almost a volitional
impotence. In place of the simpler and more spiritually rational order of old
times he would find a bewildering chaotic
Page 83

disorganised organisation of things without centre and without any large
harmonising idea. He would find not a true social order but a half arrested,
half hastening putrescence. In place of the great adaptable civilisation which
assimilated with power and was able to return tenfold for what it received, he
would meet a helplessness that bore passively or only with a few ineffectual
galvanic reactions the forces of the outside world and the stress of adverse
circumstance. At one time he would see that there had been even a loss of
faith and self-confidence so considerable as to tempt the intellectuals of the
nation to scrap the ancient spirit and ideals for an alien and imported culture.
He would note indeed the beginning of a change, but might perhaps doubt
how deep it had gone or whether it was powerful enough to save, forceful
enough to upheave the whole nation from its cherished torpor and weakness,
enlightened enough to guide a new and robust creative activity towards the
building of new significant forms for the ancient spirit.
\par Here too a better understanding points to hope rather than to the flat
despondency suggested by a too hasty surface glance. This last age of Indian
history is an example of the constant local succession of night even to the
most long and brilliant day in the evolution of the race. But it was a night
filled at first with many and brilliant constellations and even at its thickest and
worst it was the darkness of Kalidasa's \s{viceya-t\=arak\=a prabh\=ata-kalpeva
\'sarvar\=i}, “night preparing for dawn, with a few just decipherable stars.” Even
in the decline all was not loss; there were needed developments, there were
spiritual and other gains of the greatest importance for the future. If the high
spiritualised mind and stupendous force of spiritual will, \s{tapasy\=a}, that
characterised ancient India were less in evidence, there were new gains of
spiritual emotion and sensitiveness to spiritual impulse on the lower planes of
consciousness, that had been lacking before. Architecture, literature, painting,
sculpture lost the grandeur, power, nobility of old, but evoked other powers
and motives full of delicacy, vividness and grace. There was a descent from
the heights to the lower levels, but a descent that gathered riches on its way
and was needed for the fullness of spiritual discovery
Page 84

and experience. And in the worst period of decline and failure the spirit was
not dead in India, but only torpid, concealed and shackled; now emerging in
answer to a pressure of constant awakening shocks for a strong
self-liberation it finds that its sleep was a preparation of new potentialities
behind the veil of that slumber. The decline of our past culture may even be
regarded as a needed waning and dying of old forms to make way not only
for a new, but, if we will that it should be so, a greater and more perfect
creation.
\par For after all it is the will in the being that gives to circumstances their
value, and often an unexpected value; the hue of apparent actuality is a
misleading indicator. If the will in a race or civilisation is towards death, if it
clings to the lassitude of decay and the laissez-faire of the moribund or even
in strength insists blindly upon the propensities that lead to destruction or if it
cherishes only the powers of dead Time and puts away from it the powers of
the future, if it prefers life that was to life that will be, nothing, not even
abundant strength and resources and intelligence, not even many calls to live
and constantly offered opportunities will save it from an inevitable
disintegration or collapse. But if there comes to it a strong faith in itself and a
robust will to live, if it is open to the things that shall come, willing to seize on
the future and what it offers and strong to compel it where it seems adverse,
it can draw from adversity and defeat a force of invincible victory and rise
from apparent helplessness and decay in a mighty flame of renovation to the
light of a more splendid life. This is what Indian civilisation is now rearising to
do as it has always done in the eternal strength of its spirit.
\par The greatness of the ideals of the past is a promise of greater ideals for
the future. A continual expansion of what stood behind past endeavour and
capacity is the one abiding justification of a living culture. But it follows that
civilisation and barbarism are words of a quite relative significance. For from
the view of the evolutionary future European and Indian civilisation at their
best have only been half achievements, infant dawns pointing to the mature
sunlight that is to come. Neither
Page 85

Europe nor India nor any race, country or continent of mankind has ever
been fully civilised from this point of view; none has grasped the whole secret
of a true and perfect human living, none has applied with an entire insight or a
perfectly vigilant sincerity even the little they were able to achieve. If we
define civilisation as a harmony of spirit, mind and body, where has that
harmony been entire or altogether real? Where have there not been glaring
deficiencies and painful discords? Where has the whole secret of the
harmony been altogether grasped in all its parts or the complete music of life
evolved into the triumphant ease of a satisfying, durable and steadily
mounting concord? Not only are there everywhere positive, ugly, even
“hideous” blots on the life of man, but much that we now accept with
equanimity, much in which we take pride, may well be regarded by a future
humanity as barbarism or at least as semi-barbarous and immature. The
achievements that we regard as ideal, will be condemned as a self-satisfied
imperfection blind to its own errors; the ideas that we vaunt as enlightenment
will appear as a demi-light or a darkness. Not only will many forms of our life
that claim to be ancient or even eternal, as if that could be said of any form
of things, fail and disappear; the subjective shapes given to our best principles
and ideals will perhaps claim from the future at best an understanding
indulgence. There is little that will not have to undergo expansion and
mutation, change perhaps beyond recognition or accept to be modified in a
new synthesis. In the end the coming ages may look on Europe and Asia of
today much as we look on savage tribes or primitive peoples. And this view
from the future, if we can get it, is undoubtedly the most illuminating and
dynamic standpoint from which we can judge our present; but it does not
invalidate our comparative appreciation of past and extant cultures.
\par For this past and present are creating the greater steps of that future and
much of it will survive even in that which supplants it. There is behind our
imperfect cultural figures a permanent spirit to which we must cling and
which will remain permanent even hereafter; there are certain fundamental
motives or essential idea-forces which cannot be thrown aside, because they
are part
Page 86

of the vital principle of our being and of the aim of Nature in us, our
\s{svadharma}. But these motives, these idea-forces are, whether for nation
or for humanity as a whole, few and simple in their essence and capable of
an application always varying and progressive. The rest belongs to the less
internal layers of our being and must undergo the changing pressure and
satisfy the forward-moving demands of the Time-Spirit. There is this
permanent spirit in things and there is this persistent swadharma or law of our
nature; but there is too a less binding system of laws of successive
formulation,—rhythms of the spirit, forms, turns, habits of the nature, and
these endure the mutations of the ages, \s{yugadharma}. The race must obey
this double principle of persistence and mutation or bear the penalty of a
decay and deterioration that may attaint even its living centre.
\par Certainly we must repel with vigour every disintegrating or injurious
attack; but it is much more important to form our own true and independent
view of our own past achievement, present position and future
possibilities,—what we were, what we are and what we may be. In our past
we must distinguish all that was great, essential, elevating, vitalising,
illuminating, victorious, effective. And in that again we must distinguish what
was close to the permanent, essential spirit and the persistent law of our
cultural being and separate from it what was temporary and transiently
formulative. For all that was great in the past cannot be preserved as it was
or repeated for ever; there are new needs, there are other vistas before us.
But we have to distinguish too what was deficient, ill-grasped, imperfectly
formulated or only suited to the limiting needs of the age or unfavourable
circumstances. For it is quite idle to pretend that all in the past, even at its
greatest, was entirely admirable and in its kind the highest consummate
achievement of the human mind and spirit. Afterwards we have to make a
comparison of this past with our present and to understand the causes of our
decline and seek the remedy of our shortcomings and ailments. Our sense of
the greatness of our past must not be made a fatally hypnotising lure to
inertia; it should be rather an inspiration to renewed and greater achievement.
But in our criticism of the present we
Page 87

must not be one-sided or condemn with a foolish impartiality all that we are
or have done. Neither flattering or glossing over our downfall nor fouling our
nest to win the applause of the stranger, we have to note our actual
weakness and its roots, but to fix too our eyes with a still firmer attention on
our elements of strength, our abiding potentialities, our dynamic impulses of
self-renewal.
\par A second comparison has to be made between the West and India. In
the past of Europe and the past of India we can observe with an unbiassed
mind the successes of the West, the gifts it brought to humanity, but also its
large gaps, striking deficiencies, terrible and even “hideous” vices and
failures. On the other balance we have to cast ancient and mediaeval India's
achievements and failures. Here we shall find that there is little for which we
need lower our heads before Europe and much in which we rise well and
sometimes immeasurably above her. But we have to scrutinise next the
present of the West in its strong success, vitality, conquering insolence. What
has been great in it we shall allow, but take deep note too of its defects,
stumblings and dangers. And with this dangerous greatness we must
compare the present of India, her downfall and its causes, her velleities of
revival, her elements that still make for superiority now and in the future. Let
us see and take account of all that we must inevitably receive from the West
and consider how we can assimilate it to our own spirit and ideals. But let us
see too what founts of native power there are in ourselves from which we
can draw deeper, more vital and fresher streams of the power of life than
from anything the West can offer. For that will help us more than occidental
forms and motives, because it will be more natural to us, more stimulating to
our idiosyncrasy of nature, more packed with creative suggestions, more
easily taken up and completely followed in power of practice.
\par But far more helpful than any of these necessary comparisons will be
the forward look from our past and present towards our own and not any
foreign ideal of the future. For it is our evolutionary push towards the future
that will give to our past and present their true value and significance. India's
nature, her
Page 88

mission, the work that she has to do, her part in the earth's destiny, the
peculiar power for which she stands is written there in her past history and is
the secret purpose behind her present sufferings and ordeals. A reshaping of
the forms of our spirit will have to take place; but it is the spirit itself behind
past forms that we have to disengage and preserve and to give to it new and
powerful thought-significances, culture-values, a new instrumentation, greater
figures. And so long as we recognise these essential things and are faithful to
their spirit, it will not hurt us to make even the most drastic mental or physical
adaptations and the most extreme cultural and social changes. But these
changes themselves must be cast in the spirit and mould of India and not in
any other, not in the spirit of America or Europe, not in the mould of Japan or
Russia. We must recognise the great gulf between what we are and what we
may and ought to strive to be. But this we must do not in any spirit of
discouragement or denial of ourselves and the truth of our spirit, but in order
to measure the advance we have to make. For we have to find its true lines
and to find in ourselves the aspiration and inspiration, the fire and the force to
conceive them and to execute.
\par An original truth-seeking thought is needed if we are to take this stand
and make this movement, a strong and courageous intuition, an unfailing
spiritual and intellectual rectitude. The courage to defend our culture against
ignorant occidental criticism and to maintain it against the gigantic modern
pressure comes first, but with it there must be the courage to admit not from
any European standpoint but from our own outlook the errors of our culture.
Apart from all phenomena of decline or deterioration, we should recognise
without any sophistical denial those things in our creeds of life and social
institutions which are in themselves mistaken and some of them indefensible,
things weakening to our national life, degrading to our civilisation,
dishonouring to our culture. A flagrant example can be found in the treatment
of our outcastes. There are those who would excuse it as an unavoidable
error in the circumstances of the past; there are others who contend that it
was the best possible solution then available. There are still others who would
justify
Page 89

it and, with whatever modifications, prolong it as necessary to our social
synthesis. The contention is highly disputable. The excuse was there, but it is
no justification for continuance. A solution which condemns by segregation
one sixth of the nation to permanent ignominy, continued filth, uncleanliness
of the inner and outer life and a brutal animal existence instead of lifting them
out of it is no solution but rather an acceptance of weakness and a constant
wound to the social body and to its collective spiritual, intellectual, moral and
material welfare. A social synthesis which can only live by making a
permanent rule of the degradation of our fellowmen and countrymen stands
condemned and foredoomed to decay and disturbance. The evil effects may
be kept under for a long time and work only by the subtler unobserved action
of the law of Karma; but once the light of Truth is let in on these dark spots,
to perpetuate them is to maintain a seed of disruption and ruin our chances of
eventual survival.
\par Again, we have to look on our cultural ideas and our social forms and
see where they have lost their ancient spirit or real significance. Many of
them are now a fiction and no longer in accordance with the ideas they
assume or with the facts of life. Others even if good in themselves or else
beneficent in their own time are no longer sufficient for our growth. All these
must either be transformed or discarded and truer ideas and better
formulations must be found in their place. The new turn we must give them
will not always be a return upon their old significance. The new dynamic
truths we have to discover need not be parked within the limited truth of a
past ideal. On our past and present ideals we have to turn the searchlight of
the spirit and see whether they have not to be surpassed or enlarged or
brought into consonance with new wider ideals. All we do or create must be
consistent with the abiding spirit of India, but framed to fit into a greater
harmonised rhythm and plastic to the call of a more luminous future. If faith
in ourselves and fidelity to the spirit of our culture are the first requisites of a
continued and vigorous life, a recognition of greater possibilities is a condition
not less indispensable. There cannot be a healthy and victorious
Page 90

survival if we make of the past a fetish instead of an inspiring impulse.
\par The spirit and ideals of our civilisation need no defence, for in their best
parts and in their essence they were of eternal value. India's internal and
individual seeking of them was earnest, powerful, effective. But the
application in the collective life of society was subjected to serious reserves.
Never sufficiently bold and thoroughgoing, it became more and more limited
and halting when the life-force declined in her peoples. This defect, this gulf
between ideal and collective practice, has pursued all human living and was
not peculiar to India; but the dissonance became especially marked with the
lapse of time and it put at last on our society a growing stamp of weakness
and failure. There was a large effort in the beginning at some kind of
synthesis between the inner ideal and the outer life; but a static regulation of
society was its latter end. An underlying principle of spiritual idealism, an
elusive unity and fixed helpful forms of mutuality remained always there, but
also an increasing element of strict bondage and minute division and
fissiparous complexity in the social mass. The great Vedantic ideals of
freedom, unity and the godhead in man were left to the inner spiritual effort
of individuals. The power of expansion and assimilation diminished and when
powerful and aggressive forces broke in from outside, Islam, Europe, the
later Hindu society was content with an imprisoned and static
self-preservation, a mere permission to live. The form of living became more
and more narrow and it endured a continually restricted assertion of its
ancient spirit. Duration, survival was achieved, but not in the end a really
secure and vital duration, not a great, robust and victorious survival.
\par And now survival itself has become impossible without expansion. If we
are to live at all, we must resume India's great interrupted endeavour; we
must take up boldly and execute thoroughly in the individual and in the
society, in the spiritual and in the mundane life, in philosophy and religion, in
art and literature, in thought, in political and economic and social formulation
the full and unlimited sense of her highest spirit
Page 91

and knowledge. And if we do that, we shall find that the best of what comes
to us draped in occidental forms, is already implied in our own ancient
wisdom and has there a greater spirit behind it, a profounder truth and
self-knowledge and the capacity of a will to nobler and more ideal
formations. Only we need to work out thoroughly in life what we have
always known in the spirit. There and nowhere else lies the secret of the
needed harmony between the essential meaning of our past culture and the
environmental requirements of our future.
\par That view opens out a prospect beyond the battle of cultures which is
the immediate dangerous aspect of the meeting of East and West. The Spirit
in man has one aim before it in all mankind; but different continents or
peoples approach it from different sides, with different formulations and in a
differing spirit. Not recognising the underlying unity of the ultimate divine
motive, they give battle to each other and claim that theirs alone is the way
for mankind. The one real and perfect civilisation is the one in which they
happen to be born, all the rest must perish or go under. But the real and
perfect civilisation yet waits to be discovered; for the life of mankind is still
nine tenths of barbarism to one tenth of culture. The European mind gives the
first place to the principle of growth by struggle; it is by struggle that it arrives
at some kind of concert. But this concert is itself hardly more than an
organisation for growth by competition, aggression and farther battle. It is a
peace that is constantly breaking, even within itself, into a fresh strife of
principles, ideas, interests, races, classes. It is an organisation precarious at
its base and in its centre because it is founded on half-truths that deteriorate
into whole falsehoods; but it is still or has been till now vigorous in constant
achievement and able to grow powerfully and to devour and assimilate.
Indian culture proceeded on the principle of a concert that strove to find its
base in a unity and reached out again towards some greater oneness. Its aim
was a lasting organisation that would minimise or even eliminate the principle
of struggle. But it ended by achieving peace and stable arrangement through
exclusion, fragmentation and immobility of status; it drew a magic \NH circle
of safety and shut itself up in it for good.
Page 92

In the end it lost its force of aggression, weakened its power of assimilation
and decayed within its barriers. A static and limited concert, not always
enlarging itself, not plastic becomes in our human state of imperfection a
prison or a sleeping-chamber. Concert cannot be anything but imperfect and
provisional in its form and can only preserve its vitality and fulfil its ultimate
aim if it constantly adapts, expands, progresses. Its lesser unities must widen
towards a broader and more comprehensive and above all a more real and
spiritual oneness. In the larger statement of our culture and civilisation that
we have now to achieve, a greater outward expression of spiritual and
psychological oneness, but with a diversity which the mechanical method of
Europe does not tolerate, will surely be one leading motive. A concert, a unity
with the rest of mankind, in which we shall maintain our spiritual and our
outer independence will be another line of our endeavour. But what now
appears as a struggle may well be the first necessary step, before we can
formulate that unity of mankind which the West sees only in idea, but cannot
achieve because it does not possess its spirit. Therefore Europe labours to
establish unity by accommodation of conflicting interests and the force of
mechanical institutions; but so attempted, it will either not be founded at all or
will be founded on sand. Meanwhile she wishes to blot out every other
culture, as if hers were the only truth or all the truth of life and there were no
such thing as truth of the spirit. India, the ancient possessor of the truth of the
spirit, must resist that arrogant claim and aggression and affirm her own
deeper truths in spite of heavy odds and against all comers. For in its
preservation lies the only hope that mankind instead of marching to a new
cataclysm and primitive beginning with a constant repetition of the old blind
cycles will at last emerge into the light and accomplish the drive forward
which will bring the terrestrial evolution to its next step of ascent in the
progressive manifestation of the Spirit.

\book
\par
Page 93

\ht A Defence of Indian Culture

\section
\par
Page 95

\hn I
\par
\ht A Rationalistic Critic on Indian Culture
\par\drop When we try to appreciate a culture, and when that culture is the
one in which we have grown up or from which we draw our governing ideals
and are likely from overpartiality to minimise its deficiencies or from
overfamiliarity to miss aspects or values of it which would strike an
unaccustomed eye, it is always useful as well as interesting to know how
others see it. It will not move us to change our view-point for theirs; but we
can get fresh light from a study of this kind and help our self-introspection.
But there are different ways of seeing a foreign civilisation and culture.
There is the eye of sympathy and intuition and a close appreciative
self-identification: that gives us work like Sister Nivedita's {\it Web of Indian
Life} or Mr. Fielding's book on Burma or Sir John Woodroffe's studies of
Tantra. These are attempts to push aside all concealing veils and reveal the
soul of a people. It may well be that they do not give us all the hard outward
fact, but we are enlightened of something deeper which has its greater
reality; we get not the thing as it is in the deficiencies of life, but its ideal
meaning. The soul, the essential spirit is one thing, the forms taken in this
difficult human actuality are another and are often imperfect or perverted;
neither can be neglected if we would have a total vision. Then there is the
eye of the discerning and dispassionate critic who tries to see the thing as it is
in its intention and actuality, apportion the light and shade, get the balance of
merit and defect, success and failure, mark off that which evokes
appreciative sympathy from that which calls for critical censure. We may not
always agree; the standpoint is different and by its externality, by failure of
intuition and self-identification it may miss things that are essential or may not
Page 97

get the whole meaning of that which it praises or condemns: still we profit,
we can add to our sense of shade and tone or correct our own previous
judgment. Finally there is the eye of the hostile critic, convinced of the
inferiority of the culture in question, who gives plainly and honestly without
deliberate overcharging what he conceives to be sound reason for his
judgment. That too has its use for us; hostile criticism of this kind is good for
the soul and the intellect, provided we do not allow ourselves to be afflicted,
beaten down or shaken from the upholding centre of our living faith and
action. Most things in our human world are imperfect and it is sometimes well
to get a strong view of our imperfections. Or, if nothing else, we can at least
learn to appreciate opposite standpoints and get at the source of the
opposition; wisdom, insight and sympathy grow by such comparisons.
\par But hostile criticism to be of any sound value must be criticism, not
slander and false witness, not vitriol-throwing: it must state the facts without
distortion, preserve consistent standards of judgment, observe a certain effort
at justice, sanity, measure. Mr. William Archer's well-known book on India,
which on account of its very demerits I have taken as the type of the
characteristic Western or anti-Indian regard on our culture, was certainly not
of this character. It is not only that here we have a wholesale and unsparing
condemnation, a picture all shade and no light: that is a recommendation, for
Mr. Archer's professed object was to challenge the enthusiastic canonisation
of Indian culture by its admirers in the character of a devil's advocate whose
business is to find out and state in its strongest terms everything that can be
said against the claim. And for us too it is useful to have before us an attack
which covers the whole field so that we may see in one comprehensive view
the entire enemy case against our culture. But there are three vitiating
elements in his statement. First, it had an ulterior, a political object; it started
with the underlying idea that India must be proved altogether barbarous in
order to destroy or damage her case for self-government. That sort of
extraneous motive at once puts his whole pleading out of court; for it means a
constant deliberate distortion in order to serve a material interest, foreign
altogether
Page 98

to the disinterested intellectual objects of cultural comparison and criticism.
\par In fact this book is not criticism; it is literary or rather journalistic
pugilism. There too it is of a peculiar kind; it is a furious sparring at a lay
figure of India which is knocked down at pleasure through a long and
exuberant dance of misstatement and exaggeration in the hope of convincing
an ignorant audience that the performer has prostrated a living adversary.
Sanity, justice, measure are things altogether at a discount: a show-off of the
appearance of staggering and irresistible blows is the object held in view, and
for that anything comes in handy,—the facts are altogether misstated or
clumsily caricatured, the most extraordinary and unfounded suggestions
advanced with an air of obviousness, the most illogical inconsistencies
permitted if an apparent point can be scored. All this is not the occasional
freak of a well-informed critic suffering from a fit of mental biliousness and
impelled to work it off by an extravagant intellectual exercise, an
irresponsible fantasia or a hostile war-dance around a subject with which he
is not in sympathy. That is a kind of extravagance, which is sometimes
permissible and may be interesting and amusing. It is a sweet and pleasant
thing, cries the Roman poet, to play the fool in place and right season, {\it
dulce est desipere in loco}. But Mr. Archer's constant departures into
irrational extravagance are not by any means {\it in loco}. We discover very
soon,—in addition to his illegitimate motive and his deliberate unfairness this
is a third and worst cardinal defect,—that for the most part he knew
absolutely nothing about the things on which he was passing his confident
damnatory judgments. What he has done is to collect together in his mind all
the unfavourable comments he had read about India, eke them out with
casual impressions of his own and advance this unwholesome and
unsubstantial compound as his original production, although his one genuine
and native contribution is the cheery cocksureness of his secondhand
opinions. The book is a journalistic fake, not an honest critical production.
\par The writer was evidently no authority on metaphysics, which he despises
as a misuse of the human mind; yet he lays
Page 99

down the law at length about the values of Indian philosophy. He was a
rationalist to whom religion is an error, a psychological disease, a sin against
reason; yet he adjudges here between the comparative claims of religions,
assigning a {\it proxime accessit} to Christianity, mainly, it seems, because
Christians do not seriously believe in their own religion,—let not the reader
laugh, the book advances quite seriously this amazing reason,—and
bestowing the wooden spoon on Hinduism. He admits his incompetence to
speak about music, yet that has not prevented him from relegating Indian
music to a position of hopeless inferiority. His judgment on art and
architecture is of the narrowest kind; but he is generously liberal of his
decisive depreciations. In drama and literature one would expect from him
better things; but the astonishing superficiality of his standards and his
arguments here leaves one wondering how in the world he got his reputation
as a dramatic and literary critic: one concludes that either he must have used
a very different method in dealing with European literature or else it is very
easy to get a reputation of this kind in England. An ill-informed
misrepresentation of facts, a light-hearted temerity of judgment on things he
has not cared to study constitute this critic's title to write on Indian culture
and dismiss it authoritatively as a mass of barbarism.
\par It is not then for a well-informed outside view or even an instructive
adverse criticism of Indian civilisation that I have turned to Mr. William
Archer. In the end it is only those who possess a culture who can judge the
intrinsic value of its productions, because they alone can enter entirely into its
spirit. To the foreign critic we can only go for help in forming a comparative
judgment,—which too is indispensable. But if for any reason we had to
depend on a foreign judgment for the definitive view of these things, it is
evident that in each field it is to men who can speak with some authority that
we must turn. It matters very little to me what Mr. Archer or Dr. Gough or
Sir John Woodroffe's unnamed English professor may say about Indian
philosophy; it is enough for me to know what Emerson or Schopenhauer or
Nietzsche, three entirely different minds of the greatest power in this field, or
what thinkers like Cousin
Page 100

and Schlegel have to say about it or to mark the increasing influence of some
of its conceptions, the great parallel lines of thought in earlier European
thinking and the confirmations of ancient Indian metaphysics and psychology
which are the results of the most modern research and inquiry. For religion I
shall not go to Mr. Harold Begbie or any European atheist or rationalist for a
judgment on our spirituality, but see rather what are the impressions of
open-minded men of religious feeling and experience who can alone be
judges, a spiritual and religious thinker such as Tolstoy, for instance. Or I may
study even, allowing for an inevitable bias, what the more cultured Christian
missionary has to say about a religion which he can no longer dismiss as a
barbarous superstition. In art I shall not turn to the opinion of the average
European who knows nothing of the spirit, meaning or technique of Indian
architecture, painting and sculpture. For the first I shall consult some
recognised authority like Fergusson; for the others if critics like Mr. Havell
are to be dismissed as partisans, I can at least learn something from Okakura
or Mr. Laurence Binyon. In literature I shall be at a loss, for I cannot
remember that any Western writer of genius or high reputation as a critic has
had any first-hand knowledge of Sanskrit literature or of the Prakritic
tongues, and a judgment founded on translations can only deal with the
substance,—and even that in most translations of Indian work is only the
dead substance with the whole breath of life gone out of it. Still even here
Goethe's well-known epigram on the Shakuntala will be enough by itself to
show me that all Indian writing is not of a barbarous inferiority to European
creation. And perhaps we may find a scholar here and there with some
literary taste and judgment, not a too common combination, who will be of
help to us. This sort of excursion will certainly not give us an entirely reliable
scheme of values, but at any rate we shall be safer than in a resort to the
great lowland clan of Goughs, Archers and Begbies.
\par If I still find it necessary or useful to notice these lucubrations, it is for
quite another purpose. Even for that purpose all that Mr. Archer writes is not
of utility; much of it is so
Page 101

irrational, inconsequent or unscrupulous in suggestion that one can only note
and pass on. When for instance he assures his readers that Indian
philosophers think that sitting cross-legged and contemplating one's own navel
is the best way of ascertaining the truths of the universe and that their real
object is an indolent immobility and to live upon the alms of the faithful, his
object in thus describing one of the postures of abstracted meditation is to
stamp the meditation itself in the eyes of ignorant English readers with the
character of a bovine absurdity and a selfish laziness; that is an instance of
his unscrupulousness which helps us to observe the kinks of his own
rationalistic mind, but is useful for nothing else. When he denies that there is
any real morality in Hinduism or affirms that it has never claimed moral
teaching as one of its functions, statements which are the exact contrary of
the facts, when he goes so far as to say that Hinduism is the character of the
people and it indicates a melancholy proclivity towards {\it whatever} is
monstrous and unwholesome, one can only conclude that truth-speaking is not
one of the ethical virtues which Mr. William Archer thought it necessary to
practise or at least that it need be no part of a rationalist's criticism of
religion.
\par But no, after all Mr. Archer does throw a grudging tribute on the altar of
truth; for he admits in the same breath that Hinduism talks much of
righteousness and allows that there are in the Hindu writings many admirable
ethical doctrines. But that only proves that Hindu philosophy is illogical,—the
morality is there indeed, but it ought not to be; its presence does not suit Mr.
Archer's thesis. Admire the logic, the rational consistency of this champion of
rationalism! Mark that at the same time one of his objections to the
Ramayana, admitted to be one of the Bibles of the Hindu people, is that its
ideal characters, Rama and Sita, the effective patterns of the highest Indian
manhood and womanhood, are much too virtuous for his taste. Rama is too
saintly for human nature. I do not know in fact that Rama is more saintly than
Christ or St. Francis, yet I had always thought they were within the pale of
human nature; but perhaps this critic will reply that, if not beyond that
Page 102

pale, their excessive virtues are at least like the daily \NH practice of the
Hindu cult,—shall we say for example, scrupulous physical purity and
personal cleanliness and the daily turning of the mind to God in worship and
meditation,—“sufficient to place them beyond the pale of civilisation.” For he
tells us that Sita, the type of conjugal fidelity and chastity, is so excessive in
her virtue “as to verge on immorality.” Meaningless smart extravagance has
reached its highest point when it can thus verge on the idiotic. I am as sorry
to use the epithet as Mr. Archer to harp on Indian “barbarism”, but there is
really no help for it; “it expresses the essence of the situation.” If all were of
this character,—there is too much of it and it is deplorable,—a contemptuous
silence would be the only possible reply. But fortunately Apollo does not
always stretch his bow thus to the breaking-point; all Mr. Archer's shafts are
not of this wildgoose flight. There is much in his writing that expresses
crudely, but still with sufficient accuracy the feeling of recoil of the average
occidental mind at its first view of the unique characteristics of Indian culture
and that is a thing worth noting and sounding; it is necessary to understand it
and find out its value.
\par This is the utility I wish to seize on; for it is an utility and even more. It is
through the average mind that we get best at the bedrock of the
psychological differences which divide from each other great blocks of our
common humanity. The cultured mind tends to diminish the force of these
prejudices or at least even in difference and opposition to develop points of
similarity or of contact. In the average mentality we have a better chance of
getting them in their crude strength and can appreciate their full force and
bearing. Mr. Archer helps us here admirably. Not that we have not to clear
away much rubbish to get at what we want. I should have preferred to deal
with a manual of misunderstanding which had the same thoroughness of
scope, but expressed itself with a more straightforward simplicity and less of
vicious smartness and of superfluous ill-will; but none such is available. Let
us take Mr. Archer then and dissect some of his prejudices to get at their
inner psychology. We shall perhaps
Page 103

find that through all this unpleasant crudity we can arrive at the essence of a
historic misunderstanding of continents. An exact understanding of it may
even help us towards an approach to some kind of reconciliation.
Page 104

\par
\hn II
\par
\ht A Rationalistic Critic on Indian Culture–2
\par\drop It is best to start with a precise idea of the species of critic from
whom we are going to draw our estimate of oppositions. What we have
before us are the ideas of an average and typical occidental mind on Indian
culture, a man of sufficient education and wide reading, but no genius or
exceptional capacity, rather an ordinary successful talent, no flexibility or
broad sympathy of mind, but pronounced and rigid opinions which are backed
up and given an appearance of weight by the habit of using to good effect a
varied though not always sound information. This is in fact the mind and
standpoint of an average Englishman of some ability formed in the habit of
journalism. That is precisely the kind of thing we want in order to seize the
nature of the antagonism which led Mr. Rudyard Kipling,—himself a
super-journalist and “magnified non-natural” average man, the average lifted
up, without ceasing to be itself, by the glare of a kind of crude and barbaric
genius,—to affirm the eternal incompatibility of the East and the West. Let us
see what strikes such a mentality as unique and abhorrent in the Indian mind
and its culture: if we can put aside all sensitiveness of personal feeling and
look dispassionately at this phenomenon, we shall find it an interesting and
illuminative study.
\par A certain objection may be advanced against taking a rationalistic critic
with a political bias, a mind belonging at best to the today which is already
becoming yesterday, in this widely representative capacity. The
misunderstanding of continents has been the result of a long-enduring and
historic difference, and this book gives us only one phase of it which is of a
very modern character. But it is in modern times, in an age of scientific and
rationalistic enlightenment, that the difference has become
Page 105

most pronounced, the misunderstanding most aggressive and the sense of
cultural incompatibility most conscious and self-revealing. An ancient Greek,
full of disinterested intellectual curiosity and a flexible aesthetic appreciation,
was in spite of his feeling of racial and cultural superiority to the barbarian
much nearer to the Indian mind than a typical modern European. Not only
could a Pythagoras or a philosopher of the Neo-platonist school, an
Alexander or a Menander understand with a more ready sympathy the root
ideas of Asiatic culture, but an average man of ability, a Megasthenes for
instance, could be trusted to see and understand, though not inwardly and
perfectly, yet in a sufficient measure. The mediaeval European, for all his
militant Christianity and his prejudice against the infidel and paynim, yet
resembled his opponent in many characteristic ways of seeing and feeling to
an extent which is no longer possible to an average European mind, unless it
has been imbued with the new ideas which are once more lessening the gulf
between the continents. It was the rationalising of the occidental mind, the
rationalising even of its religious ideas and sentiments, which made the gulf so
wide as to appear unbridgeable. Our critic represents this increased hostility
in an extreme form, a shape given to it by the unthinking free-thinker, the
man who has not thought out originally these difficult problems, but imbibed
his views from his cultural environment and the intellectual atmosphere of the
period. He will exaggerate enormously the points of opposition, but by his
very exaggeration he will make them more strikingly clear and intelligible. He
will make up for his want of correct information and intelligent study by a
certain sureness of instinct in his attack upon things alien to his own mental
outlook.
\par It is this sureness of instinct which has led him to direct the real
gravamen of his attack against Indian philosophy and religion. The culture of
a people may be roughly described as the expression of a consciousness of
life which formulates itself in three aspects. There is a side of thought, of
ideal, of upward will and the soul's aspiration; there is a side of creative
self-expression and appreciative aesthesis, intelligence and imagination; and
there is a side of practical and outward formulation.
Page 106

A \NH people's philosophy and higher thinking give us its mind's purest,
largest and most general formulation of its consciousness of life and its
dynamic view of existence. Its religion formulates the most intense form of
its upward will and the soul's aspirations towards the fulfilment of its highest
ideal and impulse. Its art, poetry, literature provide for us the creative
expression and impression of its intuition, imagination, vital turn and creative
intelligence. Its society and politics provide in their forms an outward frame in
which the more external life works out what it can of its inspiring ideal and of
its special character and nature under the difficulties of the environment. We
can see how much it has taken of the crude material of living, what it has
done with it, how it has shaped as much of it as possible into some reflection
of its guiding consciousness and deeper spirit. None of them express the
whole secret spirit behind, but they derive from it their main ideas and their
cultural character. Together they make up its soul, mind and body. In Indian
civilisation philosophy and religion, philosophy made dynamic by religion,
religion enlightened by philosophy have led, the rest follow as best they can.
This is indeed its first distinctive character, which it shares with the more
developed Asiatic peoples, but has carried to an extraordinary degree of
thoroughgoing pervasiveness. When it is spoken of as a Brahminical
civilisation, that is the real significance of the phrase. The phrase cannot truly
imply any domination of sacerdotalism, though in some lower aspects of the
culture the sacerdotal mind has been only too prominent; for the priest as
such has had no hand in shaping the great lines of the culture. But it is true
that its main motives have been shaped by philosophic thinkers and religious
minds, not by any means all of them of Brahmin birth. The fact that a class
has been developed whose business was to preserve the spiritual traditions,
knowledge and sacred law of the race,—for this and not a mere priest trade
was the proper occupation of the Brahmin,—and that this class could for
thousands of years maintain in the greatest part, but not monopolise, the
keeping of the national mind and conscience, and the direction of social
principles, forms and manners, is only a characteristic
Page 107

indication. The fact behind is that Indian culture has been from the beginning
and has remained a spiritual, an inward-looking religio-philosophical culture.
Everything else in it has derived from that one central and original peculiarity
or has been in some way dependent on it or subordinate to it; even external
life has been subjected to the inward look of the spirit.
\par Our critic has felt the importance of this central point and directed upon
it his most unsparing attack; in other quarters he may make concessions,
allow attenuations, here he will make none. All here must be bad and
harmful, or if not deleterious, then ineffective, by the very nature of the
central ideas and motives, for any real good. This is a significant attitude. Of
course there is the polemical motive. That which is claimed for the Indian
mind and its civilisation is a high spirituality, high on all the summits of thought
and religion, permeating art and literature and religious practice and social
ideas and affecting even the ordinary man's attitude to life. If the claim is
conceded, as it is conceded by all sympathetic and disinterested inquirers
even when they do not accept the Indian view of life, then Indian culture
stands, its civilisation has a right to live. More, it has a right even to throw a
challenge to rationalistic modernism and say, “Attain first my level of
spirituality before you claim to destroy and supersede me or call on me to
modernise myself entirely in your sense. No matter if I have myself latterly
fallen from my own heights or if my present forms cannot meet all the
requirements of the future mind of humanity; I can reascend, the power is
there in me. I may even be able to develop a spiritual modernism which will
help you in your effort to exceed yourself and arrive at a larger harmony than
any you have reached in the past or can dream of in the present.” The hostile
critic feels that he must deny this claim at its roots. He tries to prove Indian
philosophy to be unspiritual and Indian religion to be an irrational animistic cult
of monstrosity. In this effort which is an attempt to stand Truth on her head
and force her to see facts upside down, he lands himself in a paradoxical
absurdity and inconsistency which destroy his case by sheer overstatement.
Still there arise even from this farrago two quite genuine issues. First, we can
Page 108

ask whether the spiritual and religio-philosophical view of life and the
government of civilisation by its ideas and motives or the rationalistic and
external view of life and the satisfaction of the vital being governed by the
intellectual and practical reason give the best lead to mankind. And granting
the value and power of a spiritual conception of life, we can ask whether the
expression given to it by Indian culture is the best possible and the most
helpful to the growth of humanity towards its highest level. These are the real
questions at issue between this Asiatic or ancient mind and the European or
modern intelligence.
\par The typical occidental mind, which prolongs still the mentality of the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, has been almost entirely fashioned by the
second view; it has grown into the mould of the vitalistic rational idea. Its
attitude to life has never been governed by a philosophic conception of
existence except during a brief period of Graeco-Roman culture and then
only in a small class of thinking and highly cultivated minds; always it is
dominated by environmental necessity and the practical reason. It has left
behind it too the ages in which spiritual and religious conceptions which
invaded it from the East, strove to impose themselves on the vitalistic and
rational tendency; it has largely rejected them or thrust them into a corner. Its
religion is the religion of life, a religion of earth and of terrestrial humanity, an
ideal of intellectual growth, vital efficiency, physical health and enjoyment, a
rational social order. This mind confronted by Indian culture is at once
repelled, first by its unfamiliarity and strangeness, then by a sense of irrational
abnormality and a total difference and often a diametrical opposition of
standpoints and finally by an abundance and plethora of unintelligible forms.
These forms appear to its eye to teem with the supranatural and therefore, as
it thinks, with the false. Even the unnatural is there, a persistent departure
from the common norm, from right method and sound device, a frame of
things in which everything, to use Mr. Chesterton's expression, is of the
wrong shape. The old orthodox Christian point of view might regard this
culture as a thing of hell, an abnormal creation of demons; the modern
orthodox rationalistic standpoint looks at it as a nightmare not
Page 109

only irrational, but antirational, a monstrosity, an out-of-date anomaly, at best
a coloured fantasia of the oriental past. That is no doubt an extreme
attitude,—it is Mr. Archer's,—but incomprehension and distaste are the rule.
One continually finds traces of these feelings even in minds which try to
understand and sympathise; but to the average occidental content with his
first raw natural impressions all is a repellent confusion. Indian philosophy is
an incomprehensible, subtly unsubstantial cloud-weaving; Indian religion
meets his eye as a mixture of absurd asceticism and an absurder gross,
immoral and superstitious polytheism. He sees in Indian art a riot of crudely
distorted or conventional forms and an impossible seeking after suggestions
of the infinite—whereas all true art should be a beautiful and rational
reproduction or fine imaginative representation of the natural and finite. He
condemns in Indian society an anachronistic and semi-barbaric survival of
old-world and mediaeval ideas and institutions. This view, which has recently
undergone some modification and is less loud and confident in expression, but
still subsists, is the whole foundation of Mr. Archer's philippic.
\par This is evident from the nature of all the objections he brings against
Indian civilisation. When you strip them of their journalistic rhetoric, you find
that they amount simply to this natural antagonism of the rationalised vital and
practical man against a culture which subordinates reason to a supra-rational
spirituality and life and action to a feeling after something which is greater
than life and action. Philosophy and religion are the soul of Indian culture,
inseparable from each other and interpenetrative. The whole objective of
Indian philosophy, its entire {\it raison d'\^etre}, is the knowledge of the spirit,
the experience of it and the right way to a spiritual existence; its single aim
coincides with the highest significance of religion. Indian religion draws all its
characteristic value from the spiritual philosophy which illumines its supreme
aspiration and colours even most of what is drawn from an inferior range of
religious experience. But what are Mr. Archer's objections, first to Indian
philosophy? Well, his first objection simply comes to this that it is too
philosophical. His second accusation is that even as that worthless thing,
metaphysical
Page 110

philosophy, it is too metaphysical. His third charge, the most positive and
plausible, is that it enervates and kills the personality and the will-power by
false notions of pessimism, asceticism, karma and reincarnation. If we take
his criticism under each of these heads, we shall see that it is really not a
dispassionate intellectual criticism, but the exaggerated expression of a
mental dislike and a fundamental difference of temperament and standpoint.
\par Mr. Archer cannot deny,—the denial would go beyond even his
unequalled capacity for affirming absurdities,—that the Indian mind has
displayed an unparalleled activity and fruitfulness in philosophical thinking. He
cannot deny that a familiarity with metaphysical conceptions and the capacity
of discussing with some subtlety a metaphysical problem is much more
wide-spread in India than in any other country. Even an ordinary Indian
intellect can understand and deal with questions of this kind where an
occidental mind of corresponding culture and attainments would be as
hopelessly out of its depth as is Mr. Archer in these pages. But he denies that
this familiarity and this subtlety are any proof of great mental
capacity—“necessarily”, he adds, I suppose in order to escape the charge of
having suggested that Plato, Spinoza or Berkeley did not show a great mental
capacity. Perhaps it is not “necessarily” such a proof; but it does show in one
great order of questions, in one large and especially difficult range of the
mind's powers and interests a remarkable and unique general development.
The European journalist's capacity for discussing with some show of acumen
questions of economy and politics or, for that matter, art, literature and
drama, is not “necessarily” proof of a great mental capacity; but it does show
a great development of the European mind in general, a wide-spread
information and normal capacity in these fields of its action. The crudity of
his opinions and his treatment of his subjects may sometimes seem a little
“barbaric” to an outsider; but the thing itself is a proof that there is a culture,
a civilisation, a great intellectual and civic achievement and a sufficient
wide-spread interest in the achievement. Mr. Archer has to avoid a similar
conclusion in
Page 111

another subtler and more difficult range about India. He does it by denying
that philosophy is of any value; this activity of the Indian mind is for him only
an unequalled diligence in knowing the unknowable and thinking about the
unthinkable. And why so? Well, because philosophy deals with a region
where there is no possible “test of values” and in such a region thought itself,
since it is simply unverifiable speculation, can be of little or no value.
\par There we come to a really interesting and characteristic opposition of
standpoints, more, a difference in the very grain of the mind. As stated, it is
the sceptical argument of the atheist and agnostic, but after all that is only the
extreme logical statement of an attitude common to the average European
turn of thinking which is inherently a positivist attitude. Philosophy has been
pursued in Europe with great and noble intellectual results by the highest
minds, but very much as a pursuit apart from life, a thing high and splendid,
but ineffective. It is remarkable that while in India and China philosophy has
seized hold on life, has had an enormous practical effect on the civilisation
and got into the very bones of current thought and action, it has never at all
succeeded in achieving this importance in Europe. In the days of the Stoics
and Epicureans it got a grip, but only among the highly cultured; at the
present day, too, we have some renewed tendency of the kind. Nietzsche has
had his influence, certain French thinkers also in France, the philosophies of
James and Bergson have attracted some amount of public interest; but it is a
mere nothing compared with the effective power of Asiatic philosophy. The
average European draws his guiding views not from the philosophic, but from
the positive and practical reason. He does not absolutely disdain philosophy
like Mr. Archer, but he considers it, if not a “man-made illusion”, yet a rather
nebulous, remote and ineffective kind of occupation. He honours the
philosophers, but he puts their works on the highest shelf of the library of
civilisation, not to be taken down or consulted except by a few minds of an
exceptional turn. He admires, but he distrusts them. Plato's idea of
philosophers as the right rulers and best directors of society seems to him the
most fantastic
Page 112

and unpractical of notions; the philosopher, precisely because he moves
among ideas, must be without any hold on real life. The Indian mind holds on
the contrary that the Rishi, the thinker, the seer of spiritual truth is the best
guide not only of the religious and moral, but the practical life. The seer, the
Rishi is the natural director of society; to the Rishis he attributes the ideals
and guiding intuitions of his civilisation. Even today he is very ready to give
the name to anyone who can give a spiritual truth which helps his life or a
formative idea and inspiration which influences religion, ethics, society, even
politics.
\par This is because the Indian believes that the ultimate truths are truths of
the spirit and that truths of the spirit are the most fundamental and most
effective truths of our existence, powerfully creative of the inner, salutarily
reformative of the outer life. To the European the ultimate truths are more
often truths of the ideative intellect, the pure reason; but, whether intellectual
or spiritual, they belong to a sphere beyond the ordinary action of the mind,
life and body where alone there are any daily verifying “tests of values”.
These tests can only be given by living experience of outward fact and the
positive and practical reason. The rest are speculations and their proper place
is in the world of ideas, not in the world of life. That brings us to a difference
of standpoint which is the essence of Mr. Archer's second objection. He
believes that all philosophy is speculation and guessing; the only verifiable
truth, we must suppose, is that of the normal fact, the outward world and our
responses to it, truth of physical science and a psychology founded on
physical science. He reproaches Indian philosophy for having taken its
speculations seriously, for presenting speculation in the guise of dogma, for
the “unspiritual” habit which mistakes groping for seeing and guessing for
knowing,—in place, I presume, of the very spiritual habit which holds the
physically sensible for the only knowable and takes the knowledge of the
body for the knowledge of the soul and spirit. He waxes bitterly sarcastic
over the idea that philosophic meditation and Yoga are the best way to
ascertain the truth of Nature and the constitution of the universe. Mr.
Archer's descriptions of Indian philosophy are
Page 113

a grossly ignorant misrepresentation of its idea and spirit, but in their essence
they represent the view inevitably taken by the normal positivist mind of the
Occident.
\par In fact, Indian philosophy abhors mere guessing and speculation. That
word is constantly applied by European critics to the thoughts and conclusions
of the Upanishads, of the philosophies, of Buddhism; but Indian philosophers
would reject it altogether as at all a valid description of their method. If our
philosophy admits an ultimate unthinkable and unknowable, it does not
concern itself with any positive description or analysis of that supreme
Mystery,—the absurdity the rationalist ascribes to it; it concerns itself with
whatever is thinkable and knowable to us at the highest term as well as on
the lower ranges of our experience. If it has been able to make its
conclusions articles of religious faith,—dogmas, as they are here called,—it is
because it has been able to base them on an experience verifiable by any
man who will take the necessary means and apply the only possible tests.
The Indian mind does not admit that the only possible test of values or of
reality is the outward scientific, the test of a scrutiny of physical Nature or
the everyday normal facts of our surface psychology, which is only a small
movement upon vast hidden subconscious and superconscious heights, depths
and ranges. What are the tests of these more ordinary or objective values?
Evidently, experience, experimental analysis and synthesis, reason,
intuition,—for I believe the value of intuition is admitted nowadays by modern
philosophy and science. The tests of this other subtler order of truths are the
same, experience, experimental analysis and synthesis, reason, intuition. Only,
since these things are truths of the soul and spirit, it must necessarily be a
psychological and spiritual experience, a psychological and psycho-physical
experimentation, analysis and synthesis, a larger intuition which looks into
higher realms, realities, possibilities of being, a reason which admits
something beyond itself, looks upward to the supra-rational, tries to give as
far as may be an account of it to the human intelligence. Yoga, which Mr.
Archer invites us so pressingly to abandon, is itself nothing
Page 114

but a well-tested means of opening up these greater realms of experience.
\par Mr. Archer and minds of his type cannot be expected to know these
things; they are beyond the little narrow range of facts and ideas which is to
them the whole arc of knowledge. But even if he knew, it would make no
difference to him; he would reject the very thought with scornful impatience,
without any degrading of his immense rationalistic superiority by any sort of
examination into the possibility of an unfamiliar truth. In this attitude he would
have the average positivist mind on his side. To that mind such notions seem
in their very nature absurd and incomprehensible,—much worse than Greek
and Hebrew, languages which have very respectable and credit-worthy
professors; but these are hieroglyphs which can only be upheld as
decipherable signs by Indians and Theosophists and mystical thinkers, a
disreputable clan. It can understand dogma and speculation about spiritual
truth, a priest, a Bible, whether disbelieving them or giving them a
conventional acceptance; but profoundest verifiable spiritual truth, firmly
ascertainable spiritual values! The idea is foreign to this mentality and sounds
to it like jargon. It can understand, even when it dismisses, an authoritative
religion, an “I believe because it is rationally impossible”; but a deepest
mystery of religion, a highest truth of philosophical thinking, a farthest
ultimate discovery of psychological experience, a systematic and ordered
experimentation of self-search and self-analysis, a constructive inner
possibility of self-perfection, all arriving at the same result, assenting to each
other's conclusions, reconciling spirit and reason and the whole psychological
nature and its deepest needs,—this great ancient and persistent research and
triumph of Indian culture baffles and offends the average positivist mind of
the West. It is bewildered by the possession of a knowledge which the West
never more than fumbled after and ended by missing. Irritated, perplexed,
contemptuous, it refuses to recognise the superiority of such a harmony to its
own lesser self-divided culture. For it is accustomed only to a religious
seeking and experience which is at war with science and philosophy or
oscillates between irrational
Page 115

belief and a troubled or else a self-confident scepticism. In Europe philosophy
has been sometimes the handmaid—not the sister—of religion; but more
often it has turned its back on religious belief in hostility or in a disdainful
separation. The war between religion and science has been almost the
leading phenomenon of European culture. Even philosophy and science have
been unable to agree; they too have quarrelled and separated. These powers
still coexist in Europe, but they are not a happy family; civil war is their
natural atmosphere.
\par No wonder that the positivist mind to which this seems the natural order
of things, should turn from a way of thinking and knowing in which there is a
harmony, a consensus, a union between philosophy and religion and a
systematised well-tested psychological experience. It is easily moved to
escape from the challenge of this alien form of knowledge by readily
dismissing Indian psychology as a jungle of self-hypnotic hallucinations, Indian
religion as a rank growth of antirational superstitions, Indian philosophy as a
remote cloud-land of unsubstantial speculation. It is unfortunate for the peace
of mind which this self-satisfied attitude brings with it and for the effect of
Mr. Archer's facile and devastating method of criticism that the West too has
recently got itself pushed into paths of thinking and discovery which seem
dangerously likely to justify all this mass of unpleasant barbarism and to bring
Europe herself nearer to so monstrous a way of thinking. It is becoming more
and more clear that Indian philosophy has anticipated in its own way most of
what has been or is being thought out in metaphysical speculation. One finds
even scientific thought repeating very ancient Indian generalisations from the
other end of the scale of research. Indian psychology which Mr. Archer
dismisses along with Indian cosmology and physiology as baseless
classification and ingenious guessing,—it is anything but that, for it is based
rigorously on experience,—is justified more and more by all the latest
psychological discoveries. The fundamental ideas of Indian religion look
perilously near to a conquest by which they will become the prominent
thought and sentiment of a new and universal religious mentality and spiritual
seeking. Who can say
Page 116

that the psycho-physiology of Indian Yoga may not be justified if certain lines
of “groping and guessing” in the West are pushed a little farther? And even
perhaps the Indian cosmological idea that there are other planes of being than
this easily sensible kingdom of Matter, may be rehabilitated in a not very
distant future? But the positivist mind may yet be of good courage: for its hold
is still strong and it has still the claim of intellectual orthodoxy and the prestige
of the right of possession; many streams must swell and meet together before
it is washed under and a tide of uniting thought sweeps humanity towards the
hidden shores of the Spirit.
Page 117

\par
\hn III
\par
\ht A Rationalistic Critic on Indian Culture–3
\par\drop This criticism so far is not very formidable; its edge, if it has any
apart from the edge of trenchant misrepresentation, turns against the
assailant. To have put a high value on philosophy, sought by it the highest
secrets of our being, turned an effective philosophic thought on life and called
in the thinkers, the men of profoundest spiritual experience, highest ideas,
largest available knowledge, to govern and shape society, to have subjected
creed and dogma to the test of the philosophic mind and founded religious
belief upon spiritual intuition, philosophical thought and psychological
experience, are signs, not of barbarism or of a mean and ignorant culture, but
marks of the highest possible type of civilisation. There is nothing here that
would warrant us in abasing ourselves before the idols of the positivist reason
or putting the spirit and aim of Indian culture at all lower than the spirit and
aim of Western civilisation whether in its high ancient period of rational
enlightenment and the speculative idea or in its modern period of broad and
minute scientific thought and strong applied knowledge. Different it is, inferior
it is not, but has rather a distinct element of superiority in the unique height of
its motive and the spiritual nobility of its endeavour.
\par It is useful to lay stress on this greatness of spirit and aim, not only
because it is of immense importance and the first test of the value of a
culture, but because the assailants take advantage of two extraneous
circumstances to create a prejudice and confuse the real issues. They have
the immense advantage of attacking India when she is prostrate and in the
dust and, materially, Indian civilisation seems to have ended in a great defeat
and downfall. Strong in this temporary advantage they can afford to show a
Page 118

superb and generous courage in kicking the surrounding dust and mire with
their hooves upon the sick and wounded lioness caught in the nets of the
hunters and try to persuade the world that she had never any strength and
virtue in her. It is an easy task in this age of the noble culture of Reason and
Mammon and Science doing the works of Moloch, when the brazen idol of
the great goddess Success is worshipped as she was never before
worshipped by cultured human beings. But they have too the yet greater
advantage of representing her to the world in a period of the eclipse of her
civilisation when after at least two thousand years of the most brilliant and
many-sided cultural activity she had for a time lost everything except the
memory of her past and her long depressed and obscured but always living
and now strongly reviving religious spirit.
\par I have touched elsewhere on the significance of this failure and this
temporary eclipse. I may have to deal with it again at closer quarters, since it
has been raised as an objection to the value of Indian culture and Indian
spirituality. At present it will be enough to say that culture cannot be judged
by material success; still less can spirituality be brought to that touchstone.
Philosophic, aesthetic, poetic, intellectual Greece failed and fell while drilled
and militarist Rome triumphed and conquered, but no one dreams of crediting
for that reason the victorious imperial nation with a greater civilisation and a
higher culture. The religious culture of Judaea is not disproved or lessened by
the destruction of the Jewish State, any more than it is proved and given
greater value by the commercial capacity shown by the Jewish race in their
dispersion. But I admit, as ancient Indian thought admitted, that material and
economic capacity and prosperity are a necessary, though not the highest or
most essential part of the total effort of human civilisation. In that respect
India throughout her long period of cultural activity can claim equality with
any ancient or mediaeval country. No people before modern times reached a
higher splendour of wealth, commercial prosperity, material appointment,
social organisation. That is the record of history, of ancient documents, of
contemporary witnesses; to deny it is to give evidence of a singular
Page 119

prepossession and obfuscation of the view, an imaginative, or is it
unimaginative, misreading of present actuality into past actuality. The
splendour of Asiatic and not least of Indian prosperity, the wealth of Ormuz
and of Ind, the “barbaric doors rough with gold”, {\it barbaricae postes
squalentes auro}, were once stigmatised by the less opulent West as a sign of
barbarism. Circumstances are now strangely reversed; the opulent barbarism
and a much less artistic ostentation of wealth are to be found in London, New
York and Paris, and it is the nakedness of India and the squalor of her
poverty which are flung in her face as evidence of the worthlessness of her
culture.
\par India's ancient and mediaeval political, administrative, military and
economic organisation was no mean achievement; the records stand and can
be left to contradict the ignorance of the uninstructed and the rhetoric of the
journalistic critic or the interested politician. There was no doubt an element
of failure and defect, almost unavoidable in the totality of a problem on so
large a scale and in the then conditions. But to exaggerate that into a count
against her civilisation would be a singular severity of criticism which few
civilisations watched to their end could survive. Failure in the end, yes,
because of the decline of her culture, but not as a result of its most valuable
elements. A later eclipse of the more essential elements of her civilisation is
not a disproof of their original value. Indian civilisation must be judged mainly
by the culture and greatness of its millenniums, not by the ignorance and
weakness of a few centuries. A culture must be judged, first by its essential
spirit, then by its best accomplishment and, lastly, by its power of survival,
renovation and adaptation to new phases of the permanent needs of the race.
In the poverty, confusion and disorganisation of a period of temporary
decline, the eye of the hostile witness refuses to see or to recognise the
saving soul of good which still keeps this civilisation alive and promises a
strong and vivid return to the greatness of its permanent ideal. Its obstinate
elastic force of rebound, its old measureless adaptability are again at work; it
is no longer even solely on the defence, but boldly aggressive. Not survival
alone, but victory and conquest are the promise of its future.
Page 120

\par But our critic does not merely deny the lofty aim and greatness of spirit
of Indian civilisation, which stand too high to be vulnerable to an assault of
this ignorant and prejudiced character. He questions its leading ideas, denies
its practical life-value, disparages its fruits, efficacy, character. Has this
disparagement any critical value or is it only a temperamental expression of
the misunderstanding natural to a widely different view of life and to a
diametrically opposite estimate of our nature's highest significances and
realities? If we consider the character of the attack and its terms, we shall
see that it amounts to no more than a condemnation passed by the positivist
mind attached to the normal values of life upon the quite different standards
of a culture which looks beyond the ordinary life of man, points to something
greater behind it and makes it a passage to something eternal, permanent and
infinite. India, we are told, has no spirituality,—a portentous discovery; on the
contrary she has succeeded, it would seem, in killing the germs of all sane
and virile spirituality. Mr. Archer evidently puts his own sense, a novel and
interesting and very occidental sense, on the word. Spirituality has meant
hitherto a recognition of something greater than mind and life, the aspiration
to a consciousness pure, great, divine beyond our normal mental and vital
nature, a surge and rising of the soul in man out of the littleness and bondage
of our lower parts towards a greater thing secret within him. That at least is
the idea, the experience, which is the very core of Indian thinking. But the
rationalist does not believe in the spirit in this sense; life, human will-force and
reason are his highest godheads. Spirituality then,—it would have been
simpler and more logical to reject the word when the thing on which it rests is
denied,—has to be given another sense, some high passion and effort of the
emotions, will and reason, directed towards the finite, not towards the infinite,
towards things temporary, not towards the eternal, towards perishable life,
not towards any greater reality which overpasses and supports the superficial
phenomena of life. The thought and suffering which seam and furrow the
ideal head of Homer, there, we are told, is the sane and virile spirituality. The
calm and compassion of Buddha
Page 121

victorious over ignorance and suffering, the meditation of the thinker tranced
in communion with the Eternal, lifted above the seekings of thought into
identity with a supreme light, the rapture of the saint made one by love in the
pure heart with the transcendent and universal Love, the will of the
Karmayogin raised above egoistic desire and passion into the impersonality of
the divine and universal will, these things on which India has set the highest
value and which have been the supreme endeavour of her greatest spirits, are
not sane, not virile. This, one may be allowed to say, is a very occidental and
up to date idea of spirituality. Homer, Shakespeare, Raphael, Spinoza, Kant,
Charlemagne, Abraham Lincoln, Lenin, Mussolini, these, shall we suggest,
are to figure henceforth not only as great poets and artists or heroes of
thought and action, but as our typical heroes and exemplars of spirituality.
Not Buddha, not Christ, Chaitanya, St. Francis, Ramakrishna; these are either
semi-barbaric Orientals or touched by the feminine insanity of an oriental
religion. The impression made on an Indian mind resembles the reaction that
a cultured intellectual might feel if he were told that good cooking, good
dressing, good engineering, good schoolmastering are the true beauty and
their pursuit the right, sane, virile aesthetic cult and literature, architecture,
sculpture and painting are only a useless scribbling on paper, an insane
hacking of stone and an effeminate daubing of canvas; Vauban, Pestalozzi,
Dr. Parr, Vatel and Beau Brummell are then the true heroes of artistic
creation and not Da Vinci, Angelo, Sophocles, Dante, Shakespeare or Rodin.
Whether Mr. Archer's epithets and his accusations against Indian spirituality
stand in the comparison, let the judicious determine. But meanwhile we see
the opposition of the standpoints and begin to understand the inwardness of
the difference between the West and India.
\par This forms the gravamen of the charge against the effective value of
Indian philosophy, that it turns away from life, nature, vital will and the effort
of man upon earth. It denies all value to life; it leads not towards the study of
nature, but away from it. It expels all volitional individuality; it preaches the
unreality of the
Page 122

world, detachment from terrestrial interests, the unimportance of the life of
the moment compared with the endless chain of past and future existences. It
is an enervating metaphysic tangled up with false notions of pessimism,
asceticism, karma and reincarnation, all of them ideas fatal to that supreme
spiritual thing, volitional individuality. This is a grotesquely exaggerated and
false notion of Indian culture and philosophy, got up by presenting one side
only of the Indian mind in colours of a sombre emphasis, after a manner
which I suppose Mr. Archer has learned from the modern masters of
realism. But in substance and spirit it is a fairly correct statement of the
notions which the European mind has formed in the past about the character
of Indian thought and culture, sometimes in ignorance, sometimes in defiance
of the evidence. For a time even it managed to impress some strong shadow
of this error on the mind of educated India. It is best to begin by setting right
the tones of the picture; that done, we can better judge the opposition of
mentality which is at the bottom of the criticism.
\par To say that Indian philosophy has led away from the study of nature is to
state a gross unfact and to ignore the magnificent history of Indian
civilisation. If by nature is meant physical Nature, the plain truth is that no
nation before the modern epoch carried scientific research so far and with
such signal success as India of ancient times. That is a truth which lies on the
face of history for all to read; it has been brought forward with great force
and much wealth of detail by Indian scholars and scientists of high eminence,
but it was already known and acknowledged by European savants who had
taken the trouble to make a comparative study in the subject. Not only was
India in the first rank in mathematics, astronomy, chemistry, medicine,
surgery, all the branches of physical knowledge which were practised in
ancient times, but she was, along with the Greeks, the teacher of the Arabs
from whom Europe recovered the lost habit of scientific enquiry and got the
basis from which modern science started. In many directions India had the
priority of discovery,—to take only two striking examples among a multitude,
the decimal notation in mathematics or the perception that the earth is a
Page 123

moving body in astronomy,—\s{cal\=a p\,rthv\=i sthir\=a bh\=ati}, the earth moves and
only appears to be still, said the Indian astronomer many centuries before
Galileo. This great development would hardly have been possible in a nation
whose thinkers and men of learning were led by its metaphysical tendencies
to turn away from the study of nature. A remarkable feature of the Indian
mind was a close attention to the things of life, a disposition to observe
minutely its salient facts, to systematise and to found in each department of it
a science, Shastra, well-founded scheme and rule. That is at least a good
beginning of the scientific tendency and not the sign of a culture capable only
of unsubstantial metaphysics.
\par It is perfectly true that Indian science came abruptly to a halt
somewhere about the thirteenth century and a period of darkness and
inactivity prevented it from proceeding forward or sharing at once in the vast
modern development of scientific knowledge. But this was not due to any
increase or intolerance of the metaphysical tendency calling the national mind
away from physical nature. It was part of a general cessation of new
intellectual activity, for philosophy too ceased to develop almost at the same
time. The last great original attempts at spiritual philosophy are dated only a
century or two later than the names of the last great original scientists. It is
true also that Indian metaphysics did not attempt, as modern philosophy has
attempted without success, to read the truth of existence principally by the
light of the truths of physical Nature. This ancient wisdom founded itself
rather upon an inner experimental psychology and a profound psychic
science, India's special strength,—but study of mind too and of our inner
forces is surely study of nature,—in which her success was greater than in
physical knowledge. This she could not but do, since it was the spiritual truth
of existence for which she was seeking; nor is any really great and enduring
philosophy possible except on this basis. It is true also that the harmony she
established in her culture between philosophical truth and truth of psychology
and religion was not extended in the same degree to the truth of physical
Nature; physical Science had not then arrived at the great universal
generalisations which would
Page 124

have made and are now making that synthesis entirely possible. Nevertheless
from the beginning, from as early as the thought of the Vedas, the Indian
mind had recognised that the same general laws and powers hold in the
spiritual, the psychological and the physical existence. It discovered too the
omnipresence of life, affirmed the evolution of the soul in Nature from the
vegetable and the animal to the human form, asserted on the basis of
philosophic intuition and spiritual and psychological experience many of the
truths which modern Science is reaffirming from its own side of the approach
to knowledge. These things too were not the results of a barren and empty
metaphysics, not the inventions of bovine navel-gazing dreamers.
\par Equally is it a misrepresentation to say that Indian culture denies all value
to life, detaches from terrestrial interests and insists on the unimportance of
the life of the moment. To read these European comments one would
imagine that in all Indian thought there was nothing but the nihilistic school of
Buddhism and the monistic illusionism of Shankara and that all Indian art,
literature and social thinking were nothing but the statement of their recoil
from the falsehood and vanity of things. It does not follow that because these
things are what the average European has heard about India or what most
interests or strikes the European scholar in her thought, therefore they are,
however great may have been their influence, the whole of Indian thinking.
The ancient civilisation of India founded itself very expressly upon four
human interests; first, desire and enjoyment, next, material, economic and
other aims and needs of the mind and body, thirdly, ethical conduct and the
right law of individual and social life, and, lastly spiritual liberation; \s{k\=ama},
\s{artha}, \s{dharma}, \s{mok\,sa}. The business of culture and social
organisation was to lead, to satisfy, to support these things in man and to build
some harmony of their forms and motives. Except in very rare cases the
satisfaction of the three mundane objects must run before the other; fullness
of life must precede the surpassing of life. The debt to the family, the
community and the gods could not be scamped; earth must have her due and
the relative its play, even if beyond it there was the glory of heaven or the
peace of the
Page 125

Absolute. There was no preaching of a general rush to the cave and the
hermitage.
\par The symmetric character of ancient Indian life and the vivid variety of its
literature were inconsistent with any exclusive other-worldly direction. The
great mass of Sanskrit literature is a literature of human life; certain
philosophic and religious writings are devoted to the withdrawal from it, but
even these are not as a rule contemptuous of its value. If the Indian mind
gave the highest importance to a spiritual release,—and whatever the
positivist mood may say, a spiritual liberation of some kind is the highest
possibility of the human spirit,—it was not interested in that alone. It looked
equally at ethics, law, politics, society, the sciences, the arts and crafts,
everything that appertains to human life. It thought on these things deeply and
scrutinisingly and it wrote of them with power and knowledge. What a fine
monument of political and administrative genius is the \s{\'Sukra-N\=iti}, to take
one example only, and what a mirror of the practical organisation of a great
civilised people! Indian art was not always solely hieratic,—it seemed so only
because it is in the temples and cave cathedrals that its greatest work
survived; as the old literature testifies, as we see from the Rajput and Mogul
paintings, it was devoted as much to the court and the city and to cultural
ideas and the life of the people as to the temple and monastery and their
motives. Indian education of women as well as of men was more rich and
comprehensive and many-sided than any system of education before modern
times. The documents which prove these things are now available to anyone
who cares to study. It is time that this parrot talk about the unpractical,
metaphysical, quietistic, anti-vital character of Indian civilisation should cease
and give place to a true and understanding estimate.
\par But it is perfectly true that Indian culture has always set the highest
value on that in man which rises beyond the terrestrial preoccupation; it has
held up the goal of a supreme and arduous self-exceeding as the summit of
human endeavour. The spiritual life was to its view a nobler thing than the life
of external power and enjoyment, the thinker greater than the man of action,
the
Page 126

spiritual man greater than the thinker. The soul that lives in God is more
perfect than the soul that lives only in outward mind or only for the claims
and joys of thinking and living matter. It is here that the difference comes in
between the typical Western and the typical Indian mentality. The West has
acquired the religious mind rather than possessed it by nature and it has
always worn its acquisition with a certain looseness. India has constantly
believed in worlds behind of which the material world is only the
antechamber. Always she has seen a self within us greater than the mental
and vital self, greater than the ego. Always she has bowed her intellect and
heart before a near and present Eternal in which the temporal being exists
and to which in man it increasingly turns for transcendence. The sentiment of
the Bengali poet, the wonderful singer and rapt devotee of the Divine
Mother,—
\par
\POEM
How rich an estate man lies fallow here!
If this were tilled, a golden crop would spring,—
\PROSE expresses the real Indian feeling about human life. But it is most
attracted by the greater spiritual possibilities man alone of terrestrial beings
possesses. The ancient Aryan culture recognised all human possibilities, but
put this highest of all and graded life according to a transitional scale in its
system of the four classes and the four orders. Buddhism first gave an
exaggerated and enormous extension to the ascetic ideal and the monastic
impulse, erased the transition and upset the balance. Its victorious system left
only two orders, the householder and the ascetic, the monk and the layman,
an effect which subsists to the present day. It is this upsetting of the Dharma
for which we find it fiercely attacked in the Vishnu Purana under the veil of
an apologue, for it weakened in the end the life of society by its tense
exaggeration and its hard system of opposites. But Buddhism too had another
side, a side turned towards action and creation and gave a new light, a new
meaning and a new moral and ideal power to life. Afterwards there came the
lofty illusionism of Shankara at the close of the two greatest known
millenniums of Indian culture. Life thenceforward was too much depreciated
as an unreality or
Page 127

a relative phenomenon, in the end not worth living, not worth our assent to it
and persistence in its motives. But this dogma was not universally accepted,
nor admitted without a struggle; Shankara was even denounced by his
adversaries as a masked Buddhist. The later Indian mind has been powerfully
impressed by his idea of Maya; but popular thought and sentiment was never
wholly shaped by it. The religions of devotion which see in life a play or Lila
of God and not a half sombre, half glaring illusion defacing the white silence
of eternity had a closer growing influence. If they did not counteract, they
humanised the austere ascetic ideal. It is only recently that educated India
accepted the ideas of English and German scholars, imagined for a time
Shankara's Mayavada to be the one highest thing, if not the whole of our
philosophy, and put it in a place of exclusive prominence. But against that
tendency too there is now a powerful reaction, not towards replacing the
spirit without life by life without the spirit, but towards a spiritual possession
of mind, life and matter. Still it is true that the ascetic ideal which in the
ancient vigour of our culture was the fine spire of life mounting into the
eternal existence, became latterly its top-heavy dome and tended under the
weight of its bare and imposing sublimity to crush the rest of the edifice.
\par But here also we should get the right view, away from all exaggeration
and false stress. Mr. Archer drags in Karma and Reincarnation into his list of
anti-vital Indian notions. But it is preposterous, it is a stupid misunderstanding
to speak of reincarnation as a doctrine which preaches the unimportance of
the life of the moment compared with the endless chain of past and future
existences. The doctrine of reincarnation and Karma tells us that the soul has
a past which shaped its present birth and existence; it has a future which our
present action is shaping; our past has taken and our future will take the form
of recurring terrestrial births and Karma, our own action, is the power which
by its continuity and development as a subjective and objective force
determines the whole nature and eventuality of these repeated existences.
There is nothing here to depreciate the importance of the present life. On the
contrary the doctrine
Page 128

gives it immense vistas and enormously enhances the value of effort and
action. The nature of the present act is of an incalculable importance because
it determines not only our immediate but our subsequent future. There will be
found too insistently pervading Indian literature and deeply settled in the mind
of the people the idea of a whole-hearted concentrated present action and
energy, tapasya, as a miraculous all-powerful force for the acquisition of our
desires, whether the material or the spiritual desires of the human will. No
doubt, our present life loses the exclusive importance which we give to it
when we regard it only as an ephemeral moment in Time never to be
repeated, our one sole opportunity, without any after-existence beyond it. But
a narrow exaggerated insistence on the present shuts up the human soul in
the prison of the moment: it may give a feverish intensity to action, but it is
inimical to calm and joy and greatness of the spirit. No doubt, too, the idea
that our present sufferings are the results of our own past action, imparts a
calm, a resignation, an acquiescence to the Indian mind which the restless
Western intelligence finds it difficult to understand or tolerate. This may
degenerate in a time of great national weakness, depression and misfortune,
into a quietistic fatalism that may extinguish the fire of reparative endeavour.
But that is not its inevitable turn, nor is it the turn given to it in the records of
the more vigorous past of our culture. The note there is of action, of tapasya.
There is too another turn given to this belief which increased with time, the
Buddhistic dogma of the succession of rebirths as a chain of Karma from
which the soul must escape into the eternal silence. This notion has strongly
affected Hinduism; but whatever is depressing in it, belongs not properly to
the doctrine of rebirth but to other elements stigmatised as an ascetic
pessimism by the vitalistic thought of Europe.
\par Pessimism is not peculiar to the Indian mind: it has been an element in
the thought of all developed civilisations. It is the sign of a culture already old,
the fruit of a mind which has lived much, experienced much, sounded life and
found it full of suffering, sounded joy and achievement and found that all is
vanity and vexation of spirit and there is nothing new under the sun or, if
Page 129

there is, its novelty is but of a day. Pessimism has been as rampant in Europe
as in India and it is certainly a singular thing to find the materialist of all
people bringing against Indian spirituality this accusation of lowering the
values of existence. For what can be more depressing than the materialistic
view of the quite physical and ephemeral nature of human life? There is
nothing in the most ascetic notes of the Indian mind like the black gloom of
certain kinds of European pessimism, a city of dreadful night without joy here
or hope beyond, and nothing like the sad and shrinking attitude before death
and the dissolution of the body which pervades Western literature. The note
of ascetic pessimism often found in Christianity is a distinctly Western note;
for it is absent in Christ's teachings. This mediaeval religion with its cross, its
salvation by suffering, its devil-ridden and flesh-ridden world and the flames
of eternal hell waiting for man beyond the grave has a character of pain and
terror alien to the Indian mind, to which indeed religious terror is a stranger.
The suffering of the world is there, but it fades into a bliss of spiritual peace
or ecstasy beyond the sorrow line. Buddha's teaching laid heavy stress on the
sorrow and impermanence of things, but the Buddhist Nirvana won by the
heroic spirit of moral self-conquest and calm wisdom is a state of ineffable
calm and joy, open not only to a few like the Christian heavens, but to all, and
very different from the blank cessation which is the mechanical release of
our pain and struggle, the sorry Nirvana of the Western pessimist, the
materialist's brute flat end of all things. Even illusionism preached, not a
gospel of sorrow, but the final unreality of joy and grief and the whole
world-existence. It admits the practical validity of life and allows its values to
those who dwell in the Ignorance. And like all Indian asceticism it places
before man the possibility of a great effort, a luminous concentration of
knowledge, a mighty urge of the will by which he can rise to an absolute
peace or an absolute bliss. A not ignoble pessimism there has been about
man's normal life as it is, a profound sense of its imperfection, a disgust of its
futile obscurity, smallness and ignorance; but an unconquerable optimism as
regards his spiritual possibility was the other side of this mood. If it did
Page 130

not believe in the ideal of an immense material progress of the race or a
perfection of the normal man with earth as its field, it believed in a sure
spiritual progress for every individual and an ultimate perfection lifted above
subjection to the shocks of life. And this pessimism with regard to life is not
the sole note of the Indian religious mind; its most popular forms accept life
as a game of God and see beyond our present conditions for every human
being the eternal nearness to the Divine. A luminous ascent into godhead was
always held to be a consummation well within man's grasp. That can hardly
be called a depressing or pessimistic theory of existence.
\par There can be no great and complete culture without some element of
asceticism in it; for asceticism means the self-denial and self-conquest by
which man represses his lower impulses and rises to greater heights of his
nature. Indian asceticism is not a mournful gospel of sorrow or a painful
mortification of the flesh in morbid penance, but a noble effort towards a
higher joy and an absolute possession of the spirit. A great joy of
self-conquest, a still joy of inner peace and the forceful joy of a supreme
self-exceeding are at the heart of its experience. It is only a mind besotted
with the flesh or too enamoured of external life and its restless effort and
inconstant satisfactions that can deny the nobility or idealistic loftiness of the
ascetic endeavour. But there are the exaggerations and deflections that all
ideals undergo. Those which are the most difficult to humanity, suffer from
them most, and asceticism may become a fanatic self-torture, a crude
repression of the nature, a tired flight from existence or an indolent avoidance
of the trouble of life and a weak recoil from the effort demanded of our
manhood. Practised not by the comparatively few who are called to it, but
preached in its extreme form to all and adopted by unfit thousands, its values
may be debased, counterfeits may abound and the vital force of the
community lose its elasticity and its forward spring. It would be idle to
pretend that such defects and untoward results have been absent in India. I
do not accept the ascetic ideal as the final solution of the problem of human
existence; but even its exaggerations have a nobler spirit behind them than
the vitalistic
Page 131

exaggerations which are the opposite defect of Western culture.
\par After all asceticism and illusionism are minor issues. The point to be
pressed is that Indian spirituality in its greatest eras and in its inmost
significance has not been a tired quietism or a conventional monasticism, but
a high effort of the human spirit to rise beyond the life of desire and vital
satisfaction and arrive at an acme of spiritual calm, greatness, strength,
illumination, divine realisation, settled peace and bliss. The question between
the culture of India and the vehement secular activism of the modern mind is
whether such an endeavour is or is not essential to man's highest perfection.
And if it is, then the other question arises whether it is to be only an
exceptional force confined to a few rare spirits or can be made the main
inspiring motive-power of a great and complete human civilisation.
Page 132

\par
\hn IV
\par
\ht A Rationalistic Critic on Indian Culture–4
\par\drop A right judgment of the life-value of Indian philosophy is intimately
bound up with a right appreciation of the life-value of Indian religion; religion
and philosophy are too intimately one in this culture to be divided from each
other. Indian philosophy is not a purely rational gymnastic of speculative logic
in the air, an ultra-subtle process of thought-spinning and word-spinning like
the greater part of philosophy in Europe; it is the organised intellectual theory
of the intuitive ordering perception of all that is the soul, the thought, the
dynamic truth, the heart of feeling and power of Indian religion. Indian
religion is Indian spiritual philosophy put into action and experience. Whatever
in the religious thought and practice of that vast, rich, thousand-sided,
infinitely pliable, yet very firmly structured system we call Hinduism, does not
in intention come under this description,—whatever its practice,—is either
social framework or projection of ritual buttresses or survival of old supports
and additions. Or else it is an excrescence and growth of corruption, a
degradation of its truth and meaning in the vulgar mind, part of the debased
mixtures that overtake all religious thinking and practice. Or, in some
instances, it is dead habit contracted in periods of fossilisation or
ill-assimilated extraneous matter gathered into this giant body. The inner
principle of Hinduism, the most tolerant and receptive of religious systems, is
not sharply exclusive like the religious spirit of Christianity or Islam; as far as
that could be without loss of its own powerful idiosyncrasy and law of being,
it has been synthetic, acquisitive, inclusive. Always it has taken in from every
side and trusted to the power of assimilation that burns in its spiritual heart
and in the white heat of its flaming centre to turn even the most
Page 133

unpromising material into forms for its spirit.
\par But before we turn to see what it is that so fiercely irritates and
exasperates our hostile Western critic in Indian religious philosophy, it is as
well to consider what he has to say about other sides of this ancient, dateless
and still vigorously living, growing, all-assimilating Hinduism. For he has a
great deal to say and it is unsparing and without measure. There is not the
intemperate drunkenness of denunciation and vomit of false witness, hatred,
uncharitableness and all things degrading and unspiritual and unclean that are
the mark of a certain type of “Christian literature” on the subject,—for
example, the superlative specimen of this noxious compound which Sir John
Woodroffe has cited from the pages of Mr. Harold Begbie, \NH “virile”
perhaps if violence is virile, but certainly not sane. But still it is a mass of
unsparing condemnation, exaggerated where it has any foundation at all and
serenely illogical in its blithe joy of deliberate misrepresentation. Still, even
from this crude mass it is possible to disengage the salient and typical
antipathies that recommend it to the uncritical and even to many critical
minds, and it is these alone that it is useful to discover.
\par The total irrationality of Hinduism is the main theme of the attack. Mr.
Archer does casually admit a philosophical, and one might therefore suppose
a rational element in the religion of India, but he disparages and dismisses as
false and positively harmful the governing ideas of this religious philosophy as
he understands or imagines he understands them. He explains the pervading
irrational character of Hindu religion by the allegation that the Indian people
have always gravitated towards the form rather than the substance and
towards the letter rather than the spirit. One would have supposed that this
kind of gravitation is a fairly universal feature of the human mind, not only in
religion, but in society, politics, art, literature, even in science. In every
conceivable human activity a cult of the form and forgetfulness of the spirit, a
turn towards convention, externalism, unthinking dogma has been the
common drift of the human mind from China to Peru and it does not skip
Europe on its way. And Europe where men have constantly fought, killed,
Page 134

burned, tortured, imprisoned, persecuted in every way imaginable by human
stupidity and cruelty for the sake of dogmas, words, rites and forms of church
government, Europe where these things have done duty for spirituality and
religion, has hardly a record which would entitle it to cast this reproach in the
face of the East. But, we are told, this gravitation afflicts the Indian religion
more than any other creed. Higher Hinduism can be scarcely said to exist
except in certain small reforming sects and current Hinduism, the popular
religion, is the cult of a monstrous folk-lore oppressive and paralysing to the
imagination,—although here again one would think that if anything an excess
rather than a paralysis of the creative imagination might be charged against
the Indian mind. Animism and magic are the prevailing characteristics. The
Indian people has displayed a genius for obfuscating reason and formalising,
materialising and degrading religion. If India has possessed great thinkers, she
has not extracted from their thoughts a rational and ennobling religion: the
devotion of the Spanish or the Russian peasant is rational and enlightened by
comparison. Irrationalism, antirationalism,—that in this laboured and
overcharged accusation is the constant cry; it is the keynote of the Archer
tune.
\par The phenomenon that has astonished and disgusted the mind of the critic
is the obstinate survival in India of the old religious spirit and large antique
religious types unsubmerged by the flood of modernism and its devastating
utilitarian free thought. India, he tells us, still clings to what not only the
Western world, but China and Japan have outgrown for ages. The religion is
a superstition full of performances of piety repulsive to the free enlightened
secular mind of the modern man. Its daily practices put it far outside the pale
of civilisation. Perhaps, if it had confined its practice decorously to church
attendance on Sundays and to marriage and funeral services and grace
before meat, it might have been admitted as human and tolerable! As it is, it
is the great anachronism of the modern world; it has not been cleansed for
thirty centuries; it is paganism, it is a wholly unfiltered paganism; its tendency
towards pollution rather than purification marks out its place as incomparably
the lowest in
Page 135

the scale of world religions. An ingenious remedy is proposed. Christianity
destroyed Paganism in Europe; therefore, since any immediate or very rapid
triumph of sceptical free-thought would be too happily abrupt a transition to
be quite feasible, we unenlightened, polluted, impure Hindus are advised to
take up for a time with Christianity, poor irrational thing that it is, dark and
deformed though it looks in the ample light of the positivist reason, because
Christianity and especially Protestant Christianity will be at least a good
preparatory step towards the noble freedom and stainless purities of atheism
and agnosticism. But if even this little cannot be hoped for in spite of
numerous famine conversions, at any rate Hinduism must somehow or other
get itself filtered, and until that hygienic operation has been executed, India
must be denied fellowship on equal terms with the civilised nations.
\par Incidentally, to support this charge of irrationalism and its companion
charge of Paganism, we find a third and more damaging count brought
against us and our religious culture, an alleged want of all moral worth and
ethical substance. There is now an increasing perception, even in Europe,
that reason is not the last word of human mind, not quite the one and only
sovereign way to truth and certainly not the sole arbiter of religious and
spiritual truth. The accusation of paganism too does not settle the question,
since plenty of cultivated minds are well able to see that there were many
great, true and beautiful things in the ancient religions that were lumped
together by Christian ignorance under that inappropriate nickname. Nor has
the world been entirely a gainer by losing these high ancient forms and
motives. But whatever the actual practice of men,—and in this respect the
normal human being is a singular mixture of the sincere but quite ineffective,
the just respectable, would-be ethical man and the self-deceiving or
semi-hypocritical Pharisee,—one can always appeal with force to a
moralistic prejudice. All religions raise high the flag of morality and, whether
religious or secular-minded, all but the antinomian, the rebel and the cynic,
profess to follow or at least to admit that standard in their lives. This
accusation is therefore about the most prejudicial charge
Page 136

that can be brought against any religion. The self-constituted prosecuting
judge whose diatribe we are examining brings it without scruple and without
measure. He has discovered that Hinduism is not an ennobling or even a
morally helpful religion; if it has talked much of righteousness, it has never
claimed moral teaching as one of its functions. A religion that can talk much
of righteousness without performing the function of moral teaching, sounds
rather like a square which can make no claim to be a quadrilateral; but let
that pass. If the Hindu is comparatively free from the grosser Western
vices,—as yet only, and only until he enters “the pale of civilisation” by
adopting Christianity or otherwise,—it is not because there is any ethical
strain in his character; it is because these vices do not come his way. His
social system founded on the barbarous idea of the Dharma, of the divine and
the human, the universal and the individual, the ethical and the social law, and
supported on it at every point, has stupidly neglected to supply him with the
opportunities of departing from it so liberally provided by Western civilisation!
And yet the whole character of Hinduism, which is the character of the
people, indicates, we are calmly told, a melancholy proclivity towards
whatever is monstrous and unwholesome! On that highest note of
unmeasured denunciation we may leave Mr. Archer's monstrous and
unwholesome dance of disparagement and turn to disengage the
temperamental sources of his dislike and anger.
\par Two things especially distinguish the normal European mind,—for we
must leave aside some great souls and some great thinkers or some moments
or epochs of abnormal religiosity and look at the dominant strain. Its two
significant characters are the cult of the inquiring, defining, effective,
practical reason and the cult of life. The great high tides of European
civilisation, Greek culture, the Roman world before Constantine, the
Renascence, the modern age with its two colossal idols, Industrialism and
physical Science, have come to the West on the strong ascending urge of this
double force. Whenever the tide of these powers has ebbed, the European
mind has entered into much confusion, darkness and weakness. Christianity
failed to spiritualise
Page 137

Europe, whatever it may have done towards humanising it in certain ethical
directions, because it ran counter to these two master instincts; it denied the
supremacy of the reason and put its anathema on a satisfied or strenuous
fullness of life. But in Asia there has been neither this predominance of
reason and the life-cult nor any incompatibility of these two powers with the
religious spirit. The great ages of Asia, the strong culminations of her
civilisation and culture,—in India the high Vedic beginning, the grand spiritual
stir of the Upanishads, the wide flood of Buddhism, Vedanta, Sankhya, the
Puranic and Tantric religions, the flowering of Vaishnavism and Shaivism in
the southern kingdoms—have come in on a surge of spiritual light and a
massive or intense climbing of the religious or the religio-philosophic mind to
its own heights, its noblest realities, its largest riches of vision and experience.
It was in such periods that intellect, thought, poetry, the arts, the material life
flowered into splendour. The ebbing of spirituality brought in always, on the
contrary, the weakness of these other powers, periods of fossilisation or at
least depression of the power of life, tracts of decline, even beginnings of
decay. This is a clue to which we have to hold if we would understand the
great lines of divergence between the East and the West.
\par Towards the spirit if not all the way to it man must rise or he misses his
upward curve of strength; but there are different ways of approach to its
secret forces. Europe, it would seem, must go through the life and the reason
and find spiritual truth by their means as a crown and a revelation; she cannot
at once take the kingdom of heaven by violence, as the saying of Christ
would have men do. The attempt confuses and obscures her reason, is
combated by her life instincts and leads to revolt, negation, a return to her
own law of nature. But Asia or at any rate India lives naturally by a spiritual
influx from above; that alone brings with it a spiritual evocation of her higher
powers of mind and life. The two continents are two sides of the integral orb
of humanity and until they meet and fuse, each must move to whatever
progress or culmination the spirit in humanity seeks, by the law of its being, its
own proper Dharma. A one-sided
Page 138

world would have been the poorer for its uniformity and the monotone of a
single culture; there is a need of divergent lines of advance until we can raise
our heads into that infinity of the spirit in which there is a light broad enough
to draw together and reconcile all highest ways of thinking, feeling and living.
That is a truth which the violent Indian assailant of a materialistic Europe or
the contemptuous enemy or cold disparager of Asiatic or Indian culture agree
to ignore. There is here no real question between barbarism and civilisation,
for all masses of men are barbarians labouring to civilise themselves. There is
only one of the dynamic differences necessary for the completeness of the
growing orb of human culture.
\par Meanwhile the divergence unfortunately gives rise to a constant warring
opposition of outlooks in religion and in most other matters, and the opposition
brings with it more or less of an incapacity for mutual understanding and even
a positive enmity or dislike. The emphasis of the Western mind is on life, the
outer life above all, the things that are grasped, visible, tangible. The inner life
is taken only as an intelligent reflection of the outer world, with the reason for
a firm putter of things into shape, an intelligent critic, builder, refiner of the
external materials offered by Nature. The present use of living, to be wholly
in this life and for this life, is all the preoccupation of Europe. The present life
of the individual and the continuous physical existence and developing mind
and knowledge of humanity make up her one absorbing interest. Even from
religion the West is apt to demand that it shall subordinate its aim or its effect
to this utility of the immediate visible world. The Greek and the Roman
looked on religious cult as a sanction for the life of the “polis” or a force for
the just firmness and stability of the State. The Middle Ages when the
Christian idea was at its height were an interregnum; it was a period during
which the Western mind was trying to assimilate in its emotion and
intelligence an oriental ideal. But it never succeeded in firmly living it and had
eventually to throw it aside or keep it only for a verbal homage. The present
moment is in the same way for Asia an interregnum dominated by an attempt
to assimilate in its intellect and life in
Page 139

spite of a rebellious soul and temperament the Western outlook and its
earth-bound ideal. And it may be safely predicted that Asia too will not
succeed in living out this alien law firmly or for a long time. But in Europe
even the Christian idea, marked in its purity by the emphasis of its
introspective tendency and an uncompromising other-worldliness, had to
compromise with the demands of the occidental temperament and in doing
that it lost its own inner kingdom. The genuine temperament of the West
triumphed and in an increasing degree rationalised, secularised and almost
annihilated the religious spirit. Religion became more and more a pale and
ever thinning shadow pushed aside into a small corner of the life and a still
smaller corner of the nature and awaiting sentence of death or exile, while
outside the doors of the vanquished Church marched on their victorious way
the triumphant secular pomps of the outward life and the positive reason and
materialistic Science.
\par The tendency to secularism is a necessary consequence of the cult of
life and reason divorced from their inmost inlook. Ancient Europe did not
separate religion and life; but that was because it had no need for the
separation. Its religion, once it got rid of the oriental element of the mysteries,
was a secular institution which did not look beyond a certain supraphysical
sanction and convenient aid to the government of this life. And even then the
tendency was to philosophise and reason away the relics of the original
religious spirit, to exile the little shadow that remained of the brooding wings
of a suprarational mystery and to get into the clear sunlight of the logical and
practical reason. But modern Europe went farther and to the very end of this
way. The more effectually to shake off the obsession of the Christian idea,
which like all oriental religious thought claims to make religion commensurate
with life and, against whatever obstacles may be opposed to it by the
unregenerate vital nature of the animal man, spiritualise the whole being and
its action, modern Europe separated religion from life, from philosophy, from
art and science, from politics, from the greater part of social action and social
existence. And it secularised and rationalised too the ethical demand so that it
might stand
Page 140

in itself on its own basis and have no need of any aid from religious sanction
or mystic insistence. At the end of this turn is an antinomian tendency,
constantly recurring in the life-history of Europe and now again in evidence.
This force seeks to annul ethics also, not by rising above it into the absolute
purity of the spirit, as mystic experience claims to do, but by breaking out of
its barriers below into an exultant freedom of the vital play. In this evolution
religion was left aside, an impoverished system of belief and ceremony to
which one might or might not subscribe with very little difference to the
march of the human mind and life. Its penetrating and colouring power had
been reduced to a faint minimum; a superficial pigmentation of dogma,
sentiment and emotion was all that survived this drastic process.
\par Even the poor little corner that was still conceded to it, intellectualism
insisted on flooding as much as possible with the light of reason. The trend
has been to reduce, not only the infrarational, but equally the suprarational
refuges of the religious spirit. The old pagan polytheistic symbolism had
clothed with its beautiful figures the ancient idea of a divine presence and
supraphysical life and Power in all Nature and in every particle of life and
matter and in all animal existence and in all the mental action of man; but this
idea, which to the secularist reason is only an intellectualised animism, had
already been ruthlessly swept aside. The Divinity had abandoned the earth
and lived far aloof and remote in other worlds, in a celestial heaven of saints
and immortal spirits. But why should there be any other worlds? I admit,
cried the progressing intellect, only this material world to which our reason
and senses bear witness. A vague bleak abstraction of spiritual existence
without any living habitation, without any means of dynamic nearness was
left to satisfy the wintry remnants of the old spiritual sense or the old
fantastic illusion. A blank and tepid Theism remained or a rationalised
Christianity without either the name of Christ or his presence. Or why should
that even be allowed by the critical light of the intelligence? A Reason or
Power, called God for want of a better name, represented by the moral and
physical Law in the material universe, is quite sufficient for any rational mind,
Page 141

—and so we get to Deism, to a vacant intellectual formula. Or why should
there be any God at all? The reason and the senses by themselves give no
witness to God; at best they can make of Him only a plausible hypothesis.
But there is no need of an unsubstantial hypothesis, since Nature is enough
and the sole thing of which we have knowledge. Thus by an inevitable
process we reach the atheistic or agnostic cult of secularism, the acme of
denial, the zenith of the positive intelligence. And there reason and life may
henceforward take their foundation and reign well satisfied over a conquered
world,—if only that inconvenient veiled ambiguous infinite Something behind
will leave them alone for the future!
\par A temperament, an outlook of this kind must necessarily be impatient of
any such thing as an earnest straining after the suprarational and the infinite.
It may tolerate some moderate play of these fine hallucinations as an
innocent indulgence of the speculative mind or the artistic imagination,
provided it is not too serious and does not intrude upon life. But asceticism
and other-worldliness are abhorrent to its temperament and fatal to its
outlook. Life is a thing to be possessed and enjoyed rationally or forcefully
according to our power, but this earthly life, the one thing we know, our only
province. At most a moderate intellectual and ethical asceticism is
permissible, the simple life, plain living, high thinking; but an ecstatic spiritual
asceticism is an offence to the reason, almost a crime. Pessimism of the
vitalistic kind may be allowed its mood or its hour; for it admits that life is an
evil that has to be lived and does not cut at its roots. But the obvious right
standpoint is to take life as it is and make the most of it, either practically for
the best ordering of its mixed good and evil or ideally with some hope of a
relative perfection. If spirituality is to have any meaning, it can only signify
the aim or the high labour of a lofty intelligence, rational will, limited beauty
and moral good which will try to make the best of this life that is, but not
vainly look beyond to some unhuman, unattainable, infinite or absolute
satisfaction. If religion is to survive, let its function be to serve this kind of
spiritual aim, to govern conduct, to give beauty and purity to our living, but let
it
Page 142

minister only to this sane and virile spirituality; let it keep within the bounds of
the practical reason and an earthly intelligence. This description no doubt
isolates the main strands and ignores departures to one side or the other; and
in all human nature there must be departures, often of an extreme kind. But it
would not, I think, be an unfair or exaggerated description of the persistent
ground and characteristic turn of the Western temperament and its outlook
and the normal poise of its intelligence. This is its self-fulfilled static poise
before it proceeds to that deflection or that self-exceeding to which man is
inevitably moved when he reaches the acme of his normal nature. For he
harbours a power in Nature that must either grow or else stagnate and cease
and disintegrate, and until he has found all himself, there is for him no static
abiding and no permanent home for his spirit.
\par Now when this Western mind is confronted with the still surviving force
of Indian religion, thought, culture, it finds that all its standards are denied,
exceeded or belittled; all that it honours is given a second place, all that it has
rejected is still held in honour. Here is a philosophy which founds itself on the
immediate reality of the Infinite, the pressing claim of the Absolute. And this
is not as a thing to speculate about, but as a real presence and a constant
Power which demands the soul of man and calls it. Here is a mentality which
sees the Divine in Nature and man and animal and inanimate thing, God at
the beginning, God in the middle, God at the end, God everywhere. And all
this is not a permissible poetical play of the imagination that need not be taken
too seriously by life, but is put forward as a thing to be lived, realised, put at
the back even of outward action, turned into stuff of thought, feeling and
conduct! And whole disciplines are systematised for this purpose, disciplines
which men still practise! And whole lives are given up to this pursuit of the
supreme Person, the universal Godhead, the One, the Absolute, the Infinite!
And to pursue this immaterial aim men are still content to abandon the
outward life and society and home and family and their most cherished
pursuits and all that has to a rational mind a substantial and ascertainable
value! Here is a country which is still heavily coloured with the
Page 143

ochre tint of the garb of the Sannyasin, where the Beyond is still preached as
a truth and men have a living belief in other worlds and reincarnation and a
whole army of antique ideas whose truth is quite unverifiable by the
instruments of physical Science. Here the experiences of Yoga are held to be
as true or more true than the experiments of the laboratory. Is this not a
thinking of things evidently unthinkable since the rational Western mind has
ceased to think about them? Is it not an attempt to know things evidently
unknowable since the modern mind has abandoned all attempt to know them?
There is amongst these irrational half-savages an endeavour even to make
this unreal thing the highest flight of life, its very goal, and a governing force,
a shaping power in art and culture and conduct. But art and culture and
conduct are things which, this rational mind tells us, Indian spirituality and
religion ought logically not to touch at all; for they belong to the realm of the
finite and can only be founded on the intellectual reason and the practical
environment and the truths and suggestions of physical Nature. There in its
native form is the apparent gulf between the two mentalities and it looks
unbridgeable. Or rather the Indian mind can understand well enough, even
when it does not share, the positivist turn of the occidental intelligence; but it
is itself to the latter a thing, if not damnable, at least abnormal and
unintelligible.
\par The effects of the Indian religio-philosophical standpoint on life are to the
occidental critic still more intolerable. If his reason was already offended by
this suprarational and to him antirational urge, it is the strongest instincts of
his temperament that are now violently shocked by their own direct contrasts
and opposites. Life, the thing on which he puts an entire and unquestioning
value, is questioned here. It is belittled and discouraged by the extremest
consequences of one side of the Indian outlook or inlook and is nowhere
accepted as it is for its own sake. Asceticism ranges rampant, is at the head
of things, casts its shadow on the vital instincts and calls man to exceed the
life of the body and even the life of the mental will and intelligence. The
Western mind lays an enormous stress upon force of personality, upon the
individual will, upon the apparent man and the
Page 144

desires and demands of his nature. But here is an opposing stress on a high
growth towards impersonality, on the widening of the individual into the
universal will, on an increasing or breaking beyond the apparent man and his
limits. The flowering of the mental and vital ego or at most its subservience to
the larger ego of the community is the West's cultural ideal. But here the ego
is regarded as the chief obstacle to the soul's perfection and its place is
proposed to be taken not by the concrete communal ego, but by something
inward, abstract, transcendental, something supramental, supraphysical,
absolutely real. The Western temperament is rajasic, kinetic, pragmatic,
active; thought for it turns always to action and has little value except for the
sake of action or else for a fine satisfaction of the mind's play and vigour. But
here the type proposed for admiration is the self-possessed sattwic man for
whom calm thought, spiritual knowledge and the inner life are the things of
the greatest importance and action is chiefly of consequence not for its own
sake, not for its rewards and fruits, but for its effects on the growth of the
inner nature. Here too is a disconcerting quietism which looks forward to the
cessation or Nirvana of all thought and action in a perpetual light and peace.
It is not surprising that a critic with an unreleased occidental mind should look
upon these contrasts with much dissatisfaction, a recoil of antipathy, an
almost ferocious repugnance.
\par But at any rate these things, however remote they may seem to his
understanding, contain something that is lofty and noble. He can disparage
them as false, antirational and depressing, but not denounce them as evil and
ignoble. Or he can do this only on the strength of such misrepresentations as
some of those we have noted in Mr. Archer's more irresponsible strictures.
These things may be signs of an antique or an antiquated mind, but are
certainly not the fruits of a barbaric culture. But when he surveys the forms
of the religion which they enlighten and animate, it does look to him as if he
was in the presence of a pure barbarism, a savage ignorant muddle. For here
is an abundance of everything of which he has so long been steadily emptying
religion in his own culture, well content to call that emptiness
Page 145

reformation, enlightenment and the rational truth of things. He sees a gigantic
polytheism, a superabundance of what seems to his intelligence rank
superstition, a limitless readiness of belief in things that are to him without
significance or incredible. The Hindu is popularly credited with thirty crores
and more of gods, as many inhabitants for all the many heavens as there are
men in this single earthly peninsula India; and he has no objection to adding, if
need be, to this mighty multitude. Here are temples, images, a priesthood, a
mass of unintelligible rites and ceremonies, the daily repetition of Sanskrit
mantras and prayers, some of them of a prehistoric creation, a belief in all
kinds of supraphysical beings and forces, saints, gurus, holy days, vows,
offerings, sacrifice, a constant reference of life to powers and influences of
which there can be no physical evidence instead of a rational scientific
dependence on the material laws which alone govern the existence of mortal
creatures. It is to him an unintelligible chaos; it is animism; it is a monstrous
folk-lore. The meaning which Indian thought puts upon these things, their
spiritual sense, escapes him altogether or it leaves him incredulous or else
strikes his mind as a vain and mad symbolism subtle, useless, futile. And not
only is the cult and belief of this people antiquated and mediaeval in kind, but
it is not kept in its proper place. Instead of putting religion into an unobtrusive
and ineffective corner, the Indian mind has the pretension, the preposterous
pretension which rational man has outgrown for ever, of filling with it the
whole of life.
\par It would be difficult to convince the too positive average European
intelligence which has “outgrown” the religious mentality or is only struggling
back towards it after a not yet liquidated bankruptcy of rationalistic
materialism, that there is any profound truth or meaning in these Indian
religious forms. It has been well said that they are rhythms of the spirit; but
one who misses the spirit must necessarily miss too the connection of the
spirit and the rhythm. The gods of this worship are, as every Indian knows,
potent names, divine forms, dynamic personalities, living aspects of the one
Infinite. Each Godhead is a form or derivation or dependent power of the
supreme Trinity,
Page 146

each Goddess a form of the universal Energy, Conscious-Force or Shakti.
But to the logical European mind monotheism, polytheism, pantheism are
irreconcilable warring dogmas; oneness, many-ness, all-ness are not and
cannot be different but concordant aspects of the eternal Infinite. A belief in
one Divine Being superior to cosmos who is all cosmos and who lives in
many forms of godhead, is a hotch-potch, mush, confusion of ideas; for
synthesis, intuitive vision, inner experience are not the forte of this strongly
external, analytic and logical mind. The image to the Hindu is a physical
symbol and support of the supraphysical; it is a basis for the meeting between
the embodied mind and sense of man and the supraphysical power, force or
presence which he worships and with which he wishes to communicate. But
the average European has small faith in disembodied entities and, if they are
at all, he would put them away into a category apart, another unconnected
world, a separate existence. A nexus between the physical and supraphysical
is to his view a meaningless subtlety admissible only in imaginative poetry and
romance.
\par The rites, ceremonies, system of cult and worship of Hinduism can only
be understood if we remember its fundamental character. It is in the first
place a non-dogmatic inclusive religion and would have taken even Islam and
Christianity into itself, if they had tolerated the process. All that it has met on
its way it has taken into itself, content if it could put its forms into some valid
relation with the truth of the supraphysical worlds and the truth of the Infinite.
Again it has always known in its heart that religion, if it is to be a reality for
the mass of men and not only for a few saints and thinkers, must address its
appeal to the whole of our being, not only to the suprarational and the rational
parts, but to all the others. The imagination, the emotions, the aesthetic sense,
even the very instincts of the half subconscient parts must be taken into the
influence. Religion must lead man towards the suprarational, the spiritual truth
and it must take the aid of the illumined reason on the way, but it cannot
afford to neglect to call Godwards the rest of our complex nature. And it
must take too each man where he stands and spiritualise him through what he
can feel and not at once force
Page 147

on him something which he cannot yet grasp as a true and living power. That
is the sense and aim of all those parts of Hinduism which are specially
stigmatised as irrational or antirational by the positivist intelligence. But the
European mind has failed to understand this plain necessity or has despised it.
It insists on “purifying” religion, by the reason and not by the spirit, on
“reforming” it, by the reason and not by the spirit. And we have seen what
were the results of this kind of purification and reformation in Europe. The
infallible outcome of that ignorant doctoring has been first to impoverish and
then slowly to kill religion; the patient has fallen a victim to the treatment,
while he might well have survived the disease!
\par The accusation of a want of ethical content is almost monstrously
false,—it is the direct opposite of the truth; but we must look for its
explanation in some kind of characteristic misunderstanding; for it is not new.
Hindu thought and literature might almost be accused of a tyrannously
pervading ethical obsession; everywhere the ethical note recurs. The idea of
the Dharma is, next to the idea of the Infinite, its major chord; Dharma, next
to spirit, is its foundation of life. There is no ethical idea which it has not
stressed, put in its most ideal and imperative form, enforced by teaching,
injunction, parable, artistic creation, formative examples. Truth, honour,
loyalty, fidelity, courage, chastity, love, long-suffering, self-sacrifice,
harmlessness, forgiveness, compassion, benevolence, beneficence are its
common themes, are in its view the very stuff of a right human life, the
essence of man's dharma. Buddhism with its high and noble ethics, Jainism
with its austere ideal of self-conquest, Hinduism with its magnificent
examples of all sides of the Dharma are not inferior in ethical teaching and
practice to any religion or system, but rather take the highest rank and have
had the strongest effective force. For the practice of these virtues in older
times there is abundant internal and foreign evidence. A considerable stamp
of them still remains in spite of much degeneracy even though there has been
some depression of the manlier qualities which only flourish in their fullest
power on the soil of freedom. The legend to the contrary began in the minds
Page 148

of English scholars with a Christian bias who were misled by the stress which
Indian philosophy lays on knowledge rather than works as the means of
salvation. For they did not note or could not grasp the meaning of the rule
well-known to all Indian spiritual seekers that a pure sattwic mind and life are
presupposed as the first step towards the divine knowledge—the doers of evil
find me not, says the Gita. And they were unable to realise that knowledge of
the truth means for Indian thought, not intellectual assent or recognition, but a
new consciousness and a life according to the truth of the Spirit. Morality is
for the Western mind mostly a thing of outward conduct; but conduct for the
Indian mind is only one means of expression and sign of a soul-state.
Hinduism only incidentally strings together a number of commandments for
observance, a table of moral laws; more deeply it enjoins a spiritual or ethical
purity of the mind with action as one outward index. It says strongly enough,
almost too strongly, “Thou shouldst not kill,” but insists more firmly on the
injunction, “Thou shalt not hate, thou shalt not yield to greed, anger or
malice,” for these are the roots of killing. And Hinduism admits relative
standards, a wisdom too hard for the European intelligence. Non-injuring is
the very highest of its laws, \s{ahi\.ms\=a paramo dharma\,h}; still it does not lay
it down as a physical rule for the warrior, but insistently demands from him
mercy, chivalry, respect for the non-belligerent, the weak, the unarmed, the
vanquished, the prisoner, the wounded, the fugitive, and so escapes the
unpracticality of a too absolutist rule for all life. A misunderstanding of this
inwardness and this wise relativity is perhaps responsible for much
misrepresentation. The Western ethicist likes to have a high standard as a
counsel of perfection and is not too much concerned if it is honoured more by
the breach than by the observance; Indian ethics puts up an equally high and
often higher standard; but less concerned with high professions than with
truth of life, it admits stages of progress and in the lower stages is satisfied if
it can moralise as much as possible those who are not yet capable of the
highest ethical concepts and practice.
\par All these criticisms of Hinduism are therefore either false in
Page 149

fact or invalid in their very nature. It remains to be considered whether the
farther yet more common charge is justified in full or in part,—the damaging
accusation that Indian culture depresses the vital force, paralyses the will,
gives no great or vigorous power, no high incentive, no fortifying and
ennobling motive to human life.
Page 150

\par
\hn V
\par
\ht A Rationalistic Critic on Indian Culture–5
\par\drop The question before us is whether Indian culture has a sufficient
power for the fortifying and ennobling of our normal human existence. Apart
from its transcendental aims, has it any pragmatic, non-ascetic, dynamic
value, any power for expansion of life and for the right control of life? This is
a question of central importance. For if it has nothing of this kind to give us,
then whatever its other cultural greatness, it cannot live. It becomes an
abnormal cis-Himalayan hot-house splendour which could subsist in its
peninsular seclusion, but must perish in the keen and arduous air of the
modern struggle of life. No anti-vital culture can survive. A too intellectual or
too ethereal civilisation void of strong vital stimulus and motive must languish
for want of sap and blood. A culture to be permanently and completely
serviceable to man must give him something more than some kind of rare
transcendental uprush towards an exceeding of all earthly life-values. It must
do more even than adorn with a great curiosity of knowledge, science and
philosophic enquiry or a rich light and blaze of art, poetry and architecture the
long stability and orderly well-being of an old, ripe and humane society. All
this Indian culture did in the past to a noble purpose. But it must satisfy too
the tests of a progressive Life-power. There must be some inspiration for the
terrestrial endeavour of man, an object, a stimulus, a force for development
and a will to live. Whether or not our end is silence and Nirvana, a spiritual
cessation or a material death, this is certain that the world itself is a mighty
labour of a vast Life-Spirit and man the present doubtful crown on earth and
the struggling but still unsuccessful present hero and protagonist of its
endeavour or its drama. A great human culture must see this
Page 151

truth in some fullness; it must impart some conscious and ideal power of
self-effectuation to this upward effort. It is not enough to found a stable base
for life, not enough to adorn it, not enough to shoot up sublimely to summits
beyond it; the greatness and growth of the race on earth must be our equal
care. To miss this great intermediate reality is a capital imperfection and in
itself a seal of failure.
\par Our critics will have it that the whole body of Indian culture bears the
stamp of just such a failure. The Western impression has been that Hinduism
is an entirely metaphysical and other-worldly system dreaming of things
beyond, oblivious of the now and here: a depressing sense of the unreality of
life or an intoxication of the Infinite turns it away from any nobility, vitality
and greatness of human aspiration and the earth's labour. Its philosophy may
be sublime, its religious spirit fervent, its ancient social system strong,
symmetrical and stable, its literature and its art good in their own way, but the
salt of life is absent, the breath of will-power, the force of a living endeavour.
This new journalistic Apollo, our Archer who is out to cleave with his arrows
the python coils of Indian barbarism, abounds in outcries in this sense. But, if
that is so, evidently India can have done nothing great, contributed no
invigorating power to human life, produced no men of mighty will, no potent
personalities, no strong significant human lives, no vital human figures in art
and poetry, no significant architecture and sculpture. And that is what our
devil's advocate tells us in graphic phrases. He tells us that there is in this
religion and philosophy a general undervaluing of life and endeavour. Life is
conceived as a shoreless expanse in which generations rise and fall as
helplessly and purposelessly as waves in mid-ocean; the individual is
everywhere dwarfed and depreciated; one solitary great character, Gautama
Buddha, who “perhaps never existed,” is India's sole contribution to the
world's pantheon, or for the rest a pale featureless Asoka. The characters of
drama and poetry are lifeless exaggerations or puppets of supernatural
powers; the art is empty of reality; the whole history of the civilisation makes
a drab, effete, melancholy picture. There is no power of life in this religion
and this \NH
Page 152

philosophy, there is no breath of life in this history, there is no colour of life in
this art and poetry; that is the blank result of Indian culture. Whoever has
seen at first hand and felt the literature, followed the history, studied the
civilisation of India, can see that this is a bitter misrepresentation, a violent
caricature, an absurd falsehood. But it is an extreme and unscrupulous way
of putting an impression often given to the European mind and, as before, we
must see why different eyes see the same object in such different colours. It
is the same primary misunderstanding that is at the root. India has lived and
lived richly, splendidly, greatly, but with a different will in life from Europe.
The idea and plan of her life have been peculiar to her temperament, original
and unique. Her values are not easy to seize for an outsider and her highest
things are easily open to hostile misrepresentation by the ignorant, precisely
because they are too high for the normal untrained mind and apt to shoot
beyond its limits.
\par There are three powers that we must grasp in order to judge the
life-value of a culture. There is, first, the power of its original conception of
life; there is, next, the power of the forms, types and rhythms it has given to
life; there is, last, the inspiration, the vigour, the force of vital execution of its
motives manifested in the actual lives of men and of the community that
flourished under its influence. The European conception of life is a thing with
which we in India are now very familiar, because our present thought and
effort are obscured with its shadow when they are not filled with its
presence. For we have been trying hard to assimilate something of it, even to
shape ourselves and especially our political, economic and outward conduct
into some imitation of its forms and rhythms. The European idea is the
conception of a Force that manifests itself in the material universe and a Life
in it of which man is almost the only discoverable meaning. This
anthropocentric view of things has not been altered by the recent stress of
Science on the vast blank inanities of an inconscient mechanical Nature. And
in man, thus unique in the inert drift of Nature, the whole effort of Life is to
arrive at some light and harmony of the understanding and ordering reason,
some efficient rational power, adorning
Page 153

beauty, strong utility, vital enjoyment, economic welfare. The free power of
the individual ego, the organised will of the corporate ego, these are the great
needed forces. The development of individual personality and an organised
efficient national life are the two things that matter in the European ideal.
These two powers have grown, striven, run riot at times, and the restless and
often violent vividness of the historic stir and the literary and artistic vivacity
of Europe are due to their powerful colours. The enjoyment of life and force,
the gallop of egoistic passion and vital satisfaction are a loud and insistent
strain, a constant high-voiced motive. Against them is another opposite effort,
the endeavour to govern life by reason, science, ethics, art; a restraining and
harmonising utility is here the foremost motive. At different times different
powers have taken the lead. Christian religiosity too has come in and added
new tones, modified some tendencies, deepened others. Each age and period
has increased the wealth of contributory lines and forces and helped the
complexity and largeness of the total conception. At present the sense of the
corporate life dominates and it is served by the idea of a great intellectual and
material progress, an ameliorated political and social state governed by
science. There is an ideal of intelligent utility, liberty and equality or else an
ideal of stringent organisation and efficiency and a perfectly mobilised,
carefully marshalled uniting of forces in a ceaseless pull towards the general
welfare. This endeavour of Europe has become terribly outward and
mechanical in its appearance; but some renewed power of a more humanistic
idea is trying to beat its way in again and man may perhaps before long
refuse to be tied on the wheel of his own triumphant machinery and
conquered by his apparatus. At any rate we need not lay too much emphasis
on what may be a passing phase. The broad permanent European conception
of life remains and it is in its own limits a great and invigorating
conception,—imperfect, narrow at the top, shut in under a heavy lid, poor in
its horizons, too much of the soil, but still with a sense in it that is strenuous
and noble.
\par The Indian conception of life starts from a deeper centre and moves on
less external lines to a very different objective. The
Page 154

peculiarity of the Indian eye of thought is that it looks through the form, looks
even through the force, and searches for the spirit in things everywhere. The
peculiarity of the Indian will in life is that it feels itself to be unfulfilled, not in
touch with perfection, not permanently justified in any intermediate
satisfaction if it has not found and does not live in the truth of the spirit. The
Indian idea of the world, of Nature and of existence is not physical, but
psychological and spiritual. Spirit, soul, consciousness are not only greater
than inert matter and inconscient force, but they precede and originate these
lesser things. All force is power or means of a secret spirit; the Force that
sustains the world is a conscious Will and Nature is its machinery of
executive power. Matter is the body or field of a consciousness hidden within
it, the material universe a form and movement of the Spirit. Man himself is
not a life and mind born of Matter and eternally subject to physical Nature,
but a spirit that uses life and body. It is an understanding faith in this
conception of existence, it is the attempt to live it out, it is the science and
practice of this high endeavour, and it is the aspiration to break out in the end
from this mind bound to life and matter into a greater spiritual consciousness
that is the innermost sense of Indian culture. It is this that constitutes the
much-talked-of Indian spirituality. It is evidently very remote from the
dominant European idea; it is different even from the form given by Europe
to the Christian conception of life. But it does not mean at all that Indian
culture concedes no reality to life, follows no material or vital aims and
satisfactions or cares to do nothing for our actual human existence. It cannot
truly be contended that a conception of this kind can give no powerful and
inspiring motive to the human effort of man. Certainly, in this view, matter,
mind, life, reason, form are only powers of the spirit and valuable not for their
own sake, but because of the Spirit within them. \s{\=Atm\=artham}, they exist
for the sake of the Self, says the Upanishad, and this is certainly the Indian
attitude to these things. But that does not depreciate them or deprive them of
their value; on the contrary it increases a hundredfold their significance. Form
and body immensely increase in importance if they are felt to be instinct
Page 155

with the life of the Spirit and are conceived as a support for the rhythm of its
workings. And human life was in ancient Indian thought no vile and unworthy
existence; it is the greatest thing known to us, it is desired, the Purana boldly
says, even by the gods in heaven. The deepening and raising of the richest or
the most potent energies of our minds, our hearts, our life-power, our bodies
are all means by which the spirit can proceed to self-discovery and the return
to its own infinite freedom and power. For when mind and heart and reason
heighten to their greatest lights and powers, they bring embodied life to the
point where it can open to a still greater light and power beyond them; the
individual mind widens into a vast universal consciousness and lifts towards a
high spiritual transcendence. These are at least no sterilising and depressing
ideas; they exalt the life of man and make something like godhead its logical
outcome.
\par The dignity given to human existence by the Vedantic thought and by the
thought of the classical ages of Indian culture exceeded anything conceived
by the Western idea of humanity. Man in the West has always been only an
ephemeral creature of Nature or a soul manufactured at birth by an arbitrary
breath of the whimsical Creator and set under impossible conditions to get
salvation, but far more likely to be thrown away into the burning refuse-heap
of Hell as a hopeless failure. At best he is exalted by a reasoning mind and
will and an effort to be better than God or Nature made him. Far more
ennobling, inspiring, filled with the motive-force of a great idea is the
conception placed before us by Indian culture. Man in the Indian idea is a
spirit veiled in the works of energy, moving to self-discovery, capable of
Godhead. He is a soul that is growing through Nature to conscious self-hood;
he is a divinity and an eternal existence; he is an ever-flowing wave of the
God-ocean, an inextinguishable spark of the supreme Fire. Even, he is in his
uttermost reality identical with the ineffable Transcendence from which he
came and greater than the godheads whom he worships. The natural
half-animal creature that for a while he seems to be is not at all his whole
being and is not in any way his real being. His inmost reality is the divine Self
or at least one dynamic eternal portion
Page 156

of it, and to find that and exceed his outward, apparent, natural self is the
greatness of which he alone of terrestrial beings is capable. He has the
spiritual capacity to pass to a supreme and extraordinary pitch of manhood
and that is the first aim which is proposed to him by Indian culture. Living no
more in the first crude type of an undeveloped humanity to which most men
still belong, \s{na yath\=a pr\=ak\,rto jana\,h}, he can even become a free perfected
semi-divine man, \s{mukta}, \s{siddha}. But he can do more; released into
the cosmic consciousness, his spirit can become one with God, one self with
the Spirit of the universe or rise into a Light and Vastness that transcends the
universe; his nature can become one dynamic power with universal Nature or
one Light with a transcendental Gnosis. To be shut up for ever in his ego is
not his ultimate perfection; he can become a universal soul, one with the
supreme Unity, one with others, one with all beings. This is the high sense
and power concealed in his humanity that he can aspire to this perfection and
transcendence. And he can arrive at it through any or all of his natural
powers if they will accept release, through his mind and reason and thought
and their illuminations, through his heart and its unlimited power of love and
sympathy, through his will and its dynamic drive towards mastery and right
action, through his ethical nature and its hunger for the universal Good,
through his aesthetic sense and its seekings after delight and beauty or
through his inner soul and its power of absolute spiritual calm, wideness, joy
and peace.
\par This is the sense of that spiritual liberation and perfection of which
Indian thought and inner discipline have been full since the earliest Vedic
times. However high and arduous this aim may be, it has always seemed to it
possible and even in a way near and normal, once spiritual realisation has
discovered its path. The positivist Western mind finds it difficult to give this
conception the rank of a living and intelligible idea. The status of the
\s{siddha}, \s{bh\=agavata}, \s{mukta} appears to it a baseless chimera. It
seems to its Christian associations a blasphemy against the solitary greatness
of God, before whom man is only a grovelling worm, to its fierce attachment
to the normal ego a negation of personality
Page 157

and a repellent menace, to its earthbound rationalism a dream, a self-hypnotic
hallucination or a deluding mania. And yet in ancient Europe the Stoics,
Platonists, Pythagoreans had made some approach to this aspiration, and
even afterwards, a few rare souls have envisaged or pursued it through
occult ways. And now it is again beginning to percolate into the Western
imagination, but less as a dynamic life-motive than in poetry and in certain
aspects of general thought or through movements like Theosophy that draw
from ancient and oriental sources. Science and philosophy and religion still
regard it with scorn as an illusion, with indifference as a dream or with
condemnation as a heathen arrogance. It is the distinction of Indian culture to
have seized on this great dynamic hope, to have kept it a living and
practicable thing and to have searched out all the possible paths to this
spiritual way of perfect existence. Indian thought has made this great thing
the common highest aim and universal spiritual destiny of the soul that is in
every human creature.
\par The value of the Indian conception for life must depend on the relations
and gradations by which it connects this difficult and distant perfection with
our normal living and present everyday nature. Put over against the latter
without any connection or any gradations that lead up to it and make it
possible, it would either be a high unattainable ideal or the detached remote
passion of a few exceptional spirits. Or even it would discourage the springs
of our natural life by the too great contrast between this spiritual being and
our own poor imperfect nature. Something of the kind has happened in later
times; the current Western impression about the exaggerated asceticism and
other-worldliness of Indian religion and philosophy is founded on the growing
gulf created by a later thought between man's spiritual possibilities and his
terrestrial status. But we must not be misled by extreme tendencies or the
overemphasis put upon them in a period of decline. If we would get at the
real meaning of the Indian idea of life, we must go back to its best times. And
we must not look at this or that school of philosophy or at some side of it as
the whole of Indian thought; the totality of the ancient philosophical thinking,
religion, literature, art, society
Page 158

must be our ground of enquiry. The Indian conception in its early soundness
made no such mistake as to imagine that this great thing can or even ought to
be done by some violent, intolerant, immediate leap from one pole of
existence to its opposite. Even the most extreme philosophies do not go so
far. The workings of the Spirit in the universe were a reality to one side of
the Indian mind, to another only a half reality, a self-descriptive Lila or
illusory Maya. To the one the world was an action of the Infinite Energy,
Shakti, to the other a figment of some secondary paradoxical consciousness
in the Eternal, Maya: but life as an intermediate reality was never denied by
any school of Indian thinking. Indian thought recognised that the normal life
of man has to be passed through with a conscientious endeavour to fulfil its
purpose: its powers must be developed with knowledge; its forms must be
perused, interpreted and fathomed; its values must be worked out, possessed
and lived; its enjoyments must be fully taken on their own level. Only
afterwards can we go on to self-existence or a supra-existence. The spiritual
perfection which opens before man is the crown of a long, patient, millennial
outflowering of the spirit in life and nature. This belief in a gradual spiritual
progress and evolution here is indeed the secret of the almost universal Indian
acceptance of the truth of reincarnation. It is only by millions of lives in
inferior forms that the secret soul in the universe, conscious even in the
inconscient, \s{cetano acetane\,su}, has arrived at humanity: it is only by
hundreds or thousands, perhaps even millions of human lives that man can
grow into his divine self-existence. Every life is a step which he can take
backward or forward; his action in life, his will in life, his thought and
knowledge by which he governs and directs his life, determine what he is yet
to be from the earliest stages to the last transcendence. \s{Yath\=a karma
yath\=a \'srutam}.
\par This belief in a gradual soul evolution with a final perfection or divine
transcendence and human life as its first direct means and often repeated
opportunity, is the pivot of the Indian conception of existence. This gives to
our life the figure of an ascent in spirals or circles; and the long period of the
ascent has to be filled in with human knowledge and human action
Page 159

and human experience. There is room within it for all terrestrial aims,
activities and aspirations; there is place in the ascent for all types of human
character and nature. For the spirit in the world assumes hundreds of forms
and follows many tendencies and gives many shapes to his play or \s{l\=il\=a}.
All are part of the total mass of our necessary experience; each has its
justification, each has its natural or true law and reason of being, each has its
utility in the play and the process. The claim of sense satisfaction was not
ignored, it was given its just importance. The soul's need of labour and heroic
action was not stifled, it was urged to its fullest action and freest scope. The
hundred forms of the pursuit of knowledge were given an absolute freedom
of movement; the play of the emotions was allowed, refined, trained till they
were fit for the divine levels; the demand of the aesthetic faculties was
encouraged in its highest rarest forms and in life's commonest details. Indian
culture did not deface nor impoverish the richness of the grand game of
human life; it never depressed or mutilated the activities of our nature. On the
contrary, subject to a certain principle of harmony and government, it allowed
them their full, often their extreme value. Man was allowed to fathom on his
way all experience, to give to his character and action a large rein and heroic
proportions, and to fill in life opulently with colour and beauty and enjoyment.
This life side of the Indian idea is stamped in strong relief over the epic and
the classical literature. It is amazing indeed that anyone with an eye or a
brain could have read the Ramayana, Mahabharata, the dramas, the literary
epics, the romances, and the great abundance of gnomic and lyric poetry in
Sanskrit and in the later tongues (to say nothing of the massive remains of
other cultural work and social and political system and speculation), and yet
failed to perceive this breadth, wealth and greatness. One must have read
without eyes to see or without a mind to understand; most indeed of the
adverse critics have not read or studied at all, but only flung about their
preconceived notions with a violent or a high-browed ignorant assurance.
\par But while it is the generous office of culture to enrich, enlarge and
encourage human life, it must also give the vital
Page 160

forces a guiding law, subject them to some moral and rational government
and lead them beyond their first natural formulations, until it can find for life
the clue to a spiritual freedom, perfection and greatness. The preeminent
value of the ancient Indian civilisation lay in the power with which it did this
work, the profound wisdom and high and subtle skill with which it based
society and ordered the individual life, and encouraged and guided the
propensities of human nature and finally turned them all towards the
realisation of its master idea. The mind it was training, while not called away
from its immediate aims, was never allowed to lose sight of the use of life as
a discipline for spiritual perfection and a passage to the Infinite.
\par The Indian mind whether in the government of life or in the discipline of
spirituality kept always in sight two main truths of our existence. First, our
being in its growth has stages through which it must pass: if there are
sometimes leaps forward, yet most of its growth is a developing progression;
the swiftest race has its stadia. Then again, life is complex and the nature of
man is complex; in each life man has to figure a certain sum of its complexity
and put that into some kind of order. But the initial movement of life is that
form of it which develops the powers of the natural ego in man; self-interest
and hedonistic desire are the original human motives,—\s{k\=ama}, \s{artha}.
Indian culture gave a large recognition to this primary turn of our nature.
These powers have to be accepted and put in order; for the natural ego-life
must be lived and the forces it evolves in the human being must be brought to
fullness. But this element must be kept from making any too unbridled claim
or heading furiously towards its satisfaction; only so can it get its full results
without disaster and only so can it be inspired eventually to go beyond itself
and turn in the end to a greater spiritual Good and Bliss. An internal or
external anarchy cannot be the rule; a life governed in any absolute or
excessive degree by self-will, passion, sense-attraction, self-interest and
desire cannot be the natural whole of a human or a humane existence. The
tempting imagination that it can and that this is the true law is a lure with
which the Western mind has played in characteristic leanings
Page 161

or outbursts; but this turn unjustly called Paganism,—for the Greek or Pagan
intelligence had a noble thought for law and harmony and self-rule,—is alien
to the Indian spirit. India has felt the call of the senses not less than Greece,
Rome or modern Europe; she perceived very well the possibility of a
materialistic life and its attraction worked on certain minds and gave birth to
the philosophy of the Charvakas: but this could not take full hold or establish
even for a time any dominant empire. Even if we can see in it, when lived on
a grand scale, a certain perverse greatness, still a colossal egoism indulgent
of the sole life of the mind and the senses was regarded by her as the nature
of the Asura and Rakshasa. It is the Titanic, gigantic or demoniac type of
spirit, permitted in its own plane, but not the proper law for a human life.
Another power claims man and overtops desire and self-interest and self-will,
the power of the Dharma.
\par The Dharma, at once religious law of action and deepest law of our
nature, is not, as in the Western idea, a creed, cult or ideal inspiring an ethical
and social rule; it is the right law of functioning of our life in all its parts. The
tendency of man to seek after a just and perfect law of his living finds its
truth and its justification in the Dharma. Every thing indeed has its dharma, its
law of life imposed on it by its nature; but for man the dharma is the
conscious imposition of a rule of ideal living on all his members. Dharma is
fixed in its essence, but still it develops in our consciousness and evolves and
has its stages; there are gradations of spiritual and ethical ascension in the
search for the highest law of our nature. All men cannot follow in all things
one common and invariable rule. Life is too complex to admit of the arbitrary
ideal simplicity which the moralising theorist loves. Natures differ; the
position, the work we have to do has its own claims and standards; the aim
and bent, the call of life, the call of the spirit within is not the same for
everyone: the degree and turn of development and the capacity, \s{adhik\=ara},
are not equal. Man lives in society and by society, and every society has its
own general dharma, and the individual life must be fitted into this wider law
of movement. But there too the individual's part in society and his nature and
the needs of his capacity and
Page 162

temperament vary and have many kinds and degrees: the social law must
make some room for this variety and would lose by being rigidly one for all.
The man of knowledge, the man of power, the productive and acquisitive
man, the priest, scholar, poet, artist, ruler, fighter, trader, tiller of the soil,
craftsman, labourer, servant cannot usefully have the same training, cannot
be shaped in the same pattern, cannot all follow the same way of living. All
ought not to be put under the same tables of the law; for that would be a
senseless geometric rigidity that would spoil the plastic truth of life. Each has
his type of nature and there must be a rule for the perfection of that type;
each has his own proper function and there must be a canon and ideal for the
function. There must be in all things some wise and understanding standard
of practice and idea of perfection and living rule,—that is the one thing
needful for the Dharma. A lawless impulsion of desire and interest and
propensity cannot be allowed to lead human conduct; even in the frankest
following of desire and interest and propensity there must be a governing and
restraining and directing line, a guidance. There must be an ethic or a
science, a restraint as well as a scope arising from the truth of the thing
sought, a standard of perfection, an order. Differing with the type of the man
and the type of the function these special dharmas would yet rise towards the
greater law and truth that contains and overtops the others and is universally
effective. This then was the Dharma, special for the special person, stage of
development, pursuit of life or individual field of action, but universal too in
the broad lines which all ought to pursue.
\par The universal embracing dharma in the Indian idea is a law of ideal
perfection for the developing mind and soul of man; it compels him to grow in
the power and force of certain high or large universal qualities which in their
harmony build a highest type of manhood. In Indian thought and life this was
the ideal of the best, the law of the good or noble man, the discipline laid
down for the self-perfecting individual, \s{\=arya}, \s{\'sre\,s\,tha}, \s{sajjana},
\s{s\=adhu}. This ideal was not a purely moral or ethical conception, although
that element might predominate; it was also intellectual, religious, social,
aesthetic, the flowering of the whole ideal
Page 163

man, the perfection of the total human nature. The most varied qualities met
in the Indian conception of the best, \s{\'sre\,s\,tha}, the good and noble man,
\s{\=arya}. In the heart benevolence, beneficence, love, compassion, altruism,
long-suffering, liberality, kindliness, patience; in the character courage,
heroism, energy, loyalty, continence, truth, honour, justice, faith, obedience
and reverence where these were due, but power too to govern and direct, a
fine modesty and yet a strong independence and noble pride; in the mind
wisdom and intelligence and love of learning, knowledge of all the best
thought, an openness to poetry, art and beauty, an educated capacity and skill
in works; in the inner being a strong religious sense, piety, love of God,
seeking after the Highest, the spiritual turn; in social relations and conduct a
strict observance of all the social dharmas, as father, son, husband, brother,
kinsman, friend, ruler or subject, master or servant, priest or warrior or
worker, king or sage, member of clan or caste: this was the total ideal of the
Arya, the man of high upbringing and noble nature. The ideal is clearly
portrayed in the written records of ancient India during two millenniums and it
is the very life-breath of Hindu ethics. It was the creation of an at once ideal
and rational mind, spirit-wise and worldly-wise, deeply religious, nobly ethical,
firmly yet flexibly intellectual, scientific and aesthetic, patient and tolerant of
life's difficulties and human weakness, but arduous in self-discipline. This was
the mind that was at the base of the Indian civilisation and gave its
characteristic stamp to all the culture.
\par But even this was only the foundation and preparation for another
highest thing which by its presence exalts human life beyond itself into
something spiritual and divine. Indian culture raised the crude animal life of
desire, self-interest and satisfied propensity beyond its first intention to a
noble self-exceeding and shapeliness by infusing into it the order and high
aims of the Dharma. But its profounder characteristic aim—and in this it was
unique—was to raise this nobler life too of the self-perfecting human being
beyond its own intention to a mightiest self-exceeding and freedom; it
laboured to infuse into it the great aim of spiritual liberation and perfection,
\s{mukti}, \s{mok\,sa}.
Page 164

The Law and its observance are neither the beginning nor the end of man;
there is beyond the field of the Law a larger realm of consciousness in which,
climbing, he emerges into a great spiritual freedom. Not a noble but ever
death-bound manhood is the highest height of man's perfection: immortality,
freedom, divinity are within his grasp. Ancient Indian culture held this highest
aim constantly before the inner eye of the soul and insistently inspired with its
prospect and light the whole conception of existence. The entire life of the
individual was ennobled by this aim; the whole ordering of society was cast
into a scale of graduated ascension towards this supreme summit.
\par A well-governed system of the individual and communal existence must
be always in the first instance an ordering of the three first powers
recognised by Indian thought. The claim of the natural functionings must be
recognised in it to the full; the pursuit of personal and communal interest and
the satisfaction of human desires as of human needs must be amply admitted
and there must be an understanding combination of knowledge and labour
towards these ends. But all must be controlled, uplifted and widened to
greater aims by the ideal of the Dharma. And if, as India believes, there is a
higher spiritual consciousness towards which man can rise, that ascent must
be kept throughout in view as the supreme goal of life. The system of Indian
culture at once indulged and controlled man's nature; it fitted him for his
social role; it stamped on his mind the generous ideal of an accomplished
humanity refined, harmonised in all its capacities, ennobled in all its members;
but it placed before him too the theory and practice of a highest change,
familiarised him with the conception of a spiritual existence and sowed in him
a hunger for the divine and the infinite. The symbols of his religion were filled
with suggestions which led towards it; at every step he was reminded of lives
behind and in front and of worlds beyond the material existence; he was
brought close to the nearness, even to the call and pressure of the Spirit who
is greater than the life it informs, of the final goal, of a high possible
immortality, freedom, God-consciousness, divine Nature. Man was not
allowed to forget that he had in him a
Page 165

highest self beyond his little personal ego and that always he and all things
live, move and have their being in God, in the Eternal, in the Spirit. There
were ways and disciplines provided in number by which he could realise this
liberating truth or could at least turn and follow at a distance this highest aim
according to his capacity and nature, \s{adhik\=ara}. Around him he saw and
revered the powerful practicants and the mighty masters of these disciplines.
These men were in early times the teachers of his youth, the summits of his
society, the inspirers and fountain-heads of his civilisation, the great lights of
his culture. Spiritual freedom, spiritual perfection were not figured as a
far-off intangible ideal, but presented as the highest human aim towards
which all must grow in the end, and were made near and possible to his
endeavour from a first practicable basis of life and the Dharma. The spiritual
idea governed, enlightened and gathered towards itself all the other
life-motives of a great civilised people.
Page 166

\par
\hn VI
\par
\ht A Rationalistic Critic on Indian Culture–6
\par\drop These are the principal lines upon which the structure of Indian
civilisation was founded and they constitute the power of its conception of
life. I do not think it can be said that there is here any inferiority to other
human cultures or to any established conception of life that has ever held
sway over the mind of man in historic times. There is nothing here that can
be said to discourage life and its flowering or to deprive it of impetus and
elevation and a great motive. On the contrary there is a full and frank
recognition and examination of the whole of human existence in all its variety
and range and power, there is a clear and wise and noble idea for its right
government and there is an ideal tendency pointing it upward and a
magnificent call to a highest possible perfection and greatness. These are the
serious uses of culture, these are the things that raise the life of man above a
crude, primitive barbarism. If a civilisation is to be judged by the power of its
ideas, their power for these great uses, Indian civilisation was inferior to
none. Certainly, it was not perfect or final or complete; for that can be
alleged of no past or present cultural idea or system. Man is in his inmost self
an infinite being, in his mind and life too he is continually growing, with
whatever stumblings and long relapses, and he cannot be permanently bound
in any one system of ideas or frame of living. The structures in which he lives
are incomplete and provisional; even those which seem the most
comprehensive lose their force to stand and are convicted by time of
insufficiency and must be replaced or change. But this at least can be said of
the Indian idea that it seized with a remarkable depth and comprehensiveness
on the main truths and needs of the whole human being, on his mind and life
and body, his artistic and ethical and intellectual
Page 167

parts of nature, his soul and spirit, and gave them a subtle and liberal, a
profoundly large and high and wise, a sympathetic and yet nobly arduous
direction. More cannot be said for any past or any existing culture.
\par But there must be in any culture aiming at completeness, not only great
and noble governing and inspiring ideas, but a harmony of forms and rhythms,
a mould into which the ideas and the life can run and settle. Here we must be
prepared for a lesser perfection, a greater incompleteness. And the reason is
that just as the spirit is vaster than its ideas, the ideas too are larger than their
forms, moulds and rhythms. Form has a certain fixity which limits; no form
can exhaust or fully express the potentialities of the idea or force that gave it
birth. Neither can any idea, however great, or any limited play of force or
form bind the infinite spirit: that is the secret of earth's need of mutation and
progress. The idea is only a partial expression of the spirit. Even within its
own limits, on its own lines it ought always to become more supple, to fill
itself out with other views, to rise and broaden to new applications, and often
it has to lose itself in uplifting transformations of its own meaning into vaster
significances or fuse itself into new and richer syntheses. In the history of all
great cultures therefore we find a passage through three periods, for this
passage is a necessary consequence of this truth of things. There is a first
period of large and loose formation; there is a second period in which we see
a fixing of forms, moulds and rhythms; and there is a closing or a critical
period of superannuation, decay and disintegration. This last stage is the
supreme crisis in the life of a civilisation; if it cannot transform itself, it enters
into a slow lingering decline or else collapses in a death agony brought about
by the rapid impact of stronger and more immediately living though not
necessarily greater or truer powers or formations. But if it is able to shake
itself free of limiting forms, to renovate its ideas and to give a new scope to
its spirit, if it is willing to understand, master and assimilate novel growths and
necessities, then there is a rebirth, a fresh lease of life and expansion, a true
renascence.
Page 168

\par Indian civilisation passed in its own large and leisurely manner through all
these stages. Its first period was that of a great spiritual outflowering in
which the forms were supple, flexible and freely responsive to its essential
spirit. That fluid movement passed away into an age of strong intellectuality
in which all was fixed into distinct, sufficiently complex, but largely treated
and still supple forms and rhythms. There came as a consequence a period of
richly crystallised fixity shaken by crises which were partly met by a change
of ideas and a modification of forms. But the hard binding of set forms
triumphed at last and there was a decline of the inspiring spirit, a stagnation
of living force, a progressive decay of the outward structure. This decay was
accompanied and at once arrested for a moment and hastened in the end by
the impact of other cultures. Today we are in the midst of a violent and
decisive crisis brought about by the inflooding of the West and of all for
which it stands. An upheaval resulted that began with the threat of a total
death and irretrievable destruction of the culture; but its course is now
uplifted on the contrary by the strong hope of a great revival, transmutation
and renascence. Each of these three stages has its special significance for
the student of culture. If we would understand the essential spirit of Indian
civilisation, we must go back to its first formative period, the early epoch of
the Veda and the Upanishads, its heroic creative seed-time. If we would
study the fixed forms of its spirit and discern the thing it eventually realised as
the basic rhythm of its life, we must look with an observing eye at the later
middle period of the Shastras and the classic writings, the age of philosophy
and science, legislation and political and social theory and many-sided critical
thought, religious fixation, art, sculpture, painting, architecture. If we would
discover the limitations, the points at which it stopped short and failed to
develop its whole or its true spirit, we must observe closely the unhappy
disclosures of its period of decline. If, finally, we would discover the
directions it is likely to follow in its transformation, we must try to fathom
what lies beneath the still confused movements of its crisis of renascence.
None of these can indeed be cut clean apart from each other; for what
developed in one period
Page 169

is already forecast and begun in the preceding age: but still on a certain large
and imprecise scale we can make these distinctions and they are necessary
for a discerning analytic view. But at present we are only concerned with the
developed forms and the principal rhythms which persisted through its greater
eras.
\par The problem which Indian culture had to solve was that of a firm
outward basis on which to found the practical development of its spirit and its
idea in life. How are we to take the natural life of man and, while allowing it
sufficient scope and variety and freedom, yet to subject it to a law, canon,
dharma, a law of function, a law of type, a law of each actual unideal human
tendency and a law too of highest ideal intention? And how again are we to
point that dharma towards its own exceeding by the fulfilment and cessation
of its disciplinary purpose in the secure freedom of the spiritual life? Indian
culture from an early stage seized upon a double idea for its own guidance
which it threw into a basic system of the individual life in the social frame.
This was the double system of the four Varnas and the four Asramas,—four
graded classes of society and four successive stages of a developing human
life.
\par The ancient Chaturvarnya must not be judged by its later disintegrated
degeneration and gross meaningless parody, the caste system. But neither
was it precisely the system of the classes which we find in other civilisations,
priesthood, nobility, merchant class and serfs or labourers. It may have had
outwardly the same starting-point, but it was given a very different revealing
significance. The ancient Indian idea was that man falls by his nature into
four types. There are, first and highest, the man of learning and thought and
knowledge; next, the man of power and action, ruler, warrior, leader,
administrator; third in the scale, the economic man, producer and
wealth-getter, the merchant, artisan, cultivator: these were the twice-born,
who received the initiation, Brahmin, Kshatriya, Vaishya. Last came the
more undeveloped human type, not yet fit for these steps of the scale,
unintellectual, without force, incapable of creation or intelligent production,
the man fit only for unskilled labour and menial service, the Shudra. The
economic order of society was
Page 170

cast in the form and gradation of these four types. The Brahmin class was
called upon to give the community its priests, thinkers, men of letters, legists,
scholars, religious leaders and guides. The Kshatriya class gave it its kings,
warriors, governors and administrators. The Vaishya order supplied it with its
producers, agriculturists, craftsmen, artisans, merchants and traders. The
Shudra class ministered to its need of menials and servants. As far as this
went, there was nothing peculiar in the system except its extraordinary
durability and, perhaps, the supreme position given to religion, thought and
learning, not only at the top of the scale,—for that can be paralleled from one
or two other civilisations,—but as the dominant power. The Indian idea in its
purity fixed the status of a man in this order not by his birth, but by his
capacities and his inner nature, and, if this rule had been strictly observed,
that would have been a very clear mark of distinctness, a superiority of a
unique kind. But even the best society is always something of a machine and
gravitates towards the material sign and standard, and to found truly the
social order upon this finer psychological basis would have been in those
times a difficult and vain endeavour. In practice we find that birth became
the basis of the Varna. It is elsewhere that we must look for the strong
distinguishing mark which has made of this social structure a thing apart and
sole in its type.
\par At no time indeed was the adherence to the economic rule quite
absolute. The early ages show a considerable flexibility which was not quite
lost in the process of complex crystallisation into a fixed form. And even in
the greater rigidity of the latter-day caste system there has been in practice a
confusion of economic functions. The vitality of a vigorous community cannot
obey at every point the indications of a pattern and tradition cut by the
mechanising mind. Moreover there was always a difference between the
ideal theory of the system and its rougher unideal practice. For the material
side of an idea or system has always its weaknesses even in its best times,
and the final defect of all systems of this kind is that they stiffen into a fixed
hierarchy which cannot maintain permanently its purity or the utility it was
meant to serve. It becomes a soulless
Page 171

form and prolongs itself in a state of corruption, degeneracy or oppressive
formalism when the uses that justified it are no longer in existence. Even
when its ways can no longer be made consistent with the developing needs of
the growth of humanity, the formal system persists and corrupts the truth of
life and blocks progress. Indian society did not escape this general law; it was
overtaken by these deficiencies, lost the true sense of the thing which it set
out to embody and degenerated into a chaos of castes, developing evils which
we are now much embarrassed to eliminate. But it was a well-devised and
necessary scheme in its time; it gave the community the firm and nobly built
stability it needed for the security of its cultural development,—a stability
hardly paralleled in any other culture. And, as interpreted by the Indian
genius, it became a greater thing than a mere outward economic, political and
social mechanism intended to serve the needs and convenience of the
collective life.
\par For the real greatness of the Indian system of the four varnas did not lie
in its well-ordered division of economic function; its true originality and
permanent value was in the ethical and spiritual content which the thinkers
and builders of the society poured into these forms. This inner content started
with the idea that the intellectual, ethical and spiritual growth of the individual
is the central need of the race. Society itself is only the necessary framework
for this growth; it is a system of relations which provides it with its needed
medium, field and conditions and with a nexus of helpful influences. A secure
place had to be found in the community for the individual man from which he
could at once serve these relations, helping to maintain the society and pay it
his debt of duty and assistance, and proceed to his own self-development
with the best possible aid from the communal life. Birth was accepted in
practice as the first gross and natural indicator; for heredity to the Indian
mind has always ranked as a factor of the highest importance: it was even
taken in later thought as a sign of the nature and as an index to the
surroundings which the individual had prepared for himself by his past
soul-development in former existences. But birth is not and cannot be the sole
test of Varna. The intellectual capacity
Page 172

of the man, the turn of his temperament, his ethical nature, his spiritual
stature, these are the important factors. There was erected therefore a rule
of family living, a system of individual observance and self-training, a force of
upbringing and education which would bring out and formulate these essential
things. The individual man was carefully trained in the capacities, habits and
attainments, and habituated to the sense of honour and duty necessary for the
discharge of his allotted function in life. He was scrupulously equipped with
the science of the thing he had to do, the best way to succeed in it as an
interest, \s{artha}, and to attain to the highest rule, canon and recognised
perfection of its activities, economic, political, sacerdotal, literary, scholastic
or whatever else they might be. Even the most despised pursuits had their
education, their law and canon, their ambition of success, their sense of
honour in the discharge and scruple of well-doing, their dignity of a fixed
standard of perfection, and it was because they had these things that even
the lowest and least attractive could be in a certain degree a means of
self-finding and ordered self-satisfaction. In addition to this special function
and training there were the general accomplishments, sciences, arts, graces
of life, those which satisfy the intellectual, aesthetic and hedonistic powers of
human nature. These in ancient India were many and various, were taught
with minuteness, thoroughness and subtlety and were available to all men of
culture.
\par But while there was provision for all these things and it was made with a
vivid liberality of the life-spirit and a noble sense of order, the spirit of Indian
culture did not, like other ancient cultures, stop here. It said to the individual:
“This is only the substructure; it is of a pressing importance indeed, but still
not the last and greatest thing. When you have paid your debt to society, filled
well and admirably your place in its life, helped its maintenance and continuity
and taken from it your legitimate and desired satisfactions, there still remains
the greatest thing of all. There is still your own self, the inner you, the soul
which is a spiritual portion of the Infinite, one in its essence with the Eternal.
This self, this soul in you you have to find, you are here for that, and it is from
the place I have provided for you in life
Page 173

and by this training that you can begin to find it. For to each Varna I have
supplied its highest ideal of manhood, the highest ideal way of which your
nature is capable. By directing your life and nature in its own law of being
towards that perfection, you can not only grow towards the ideal and enter
into harmony with universal nature but come also into nearness and contact
with a greater nature of divinity and move towards transcendence. That is
the real object before you. From the life-basis I give you you can rise to the
liberating knowledge which brings a spiritual release, \s{mok\,sa}. Then you
can grow out of all these limitations in which you are being trained; you can
grow through the fulfilled Dharma and beyond it into the eternity of your self,
into the fullness, freedom, greatness and bliss of the immortal spirit; for that is
what each man is behind the veils of his nature. When you have done that
you are free. Then you have gone beyond all the dharmas; you are then a
universal soul, one with all existence, and you can either act in that divine
liberty for the good of all living things or else turn to enjoy in solitude the bliss
of eternity and transcendence.” The whole system of society, founded on the
four varnas, was made a harmonious means for the elevation and progress of
the soul, mind and life from the natural pursuit of interest and desire first to
the perfection of the law of our being, Dharma, and at the end to a highest
spiritual freedom. For man's true end in life must be always this realisation of
his own immortal self, this entry in its secret of an infinite and eternal
existence.
\par The Indian system did not entirely leave this difficult growth to the
individual's unaided inner initiative. It supplied him with a framework; it gave
him a scale and gradation for his life which could be made into a kind of
ladder rising in that sense. This high convenience was the object of the four
Asramas. Life was divided into four natural periods and each of them
marked out a stage in the working out of this cultural idea of living. There
was the period of the student, the period of the householder, the period of the
recluse or forest-dweller, the period of the free supersocial man,
\s{parivr\=ajaka}. The student life was framed to lay the groundwork of what
the man had to know, do and
Page 174

be. It gave a thorough training in the necessary arts, sciences, branches of
knowledge, but it was still more insistent on the discipline of the ethical nature
and in earlier days contained as an indispensable factor a grounding in the
Vedic formula of spiritual knowledge. In these earlier days this training was
given in suitable surroundings far away from the life of cities and the teacher
was one who had himself passed through the round of this circle of living and,
very usually, even, one who had arrived at some remarkable realisation of
spiritual knowledge. But subsequently education became more intellectual
and mundane; it was imparted in cities and universities and aimed less at an
inner preparation of character and knowledge and more at instruction and the
training of the intelligence. But in the beginning the Aryan man was really
prepared in some degree for the four great objects of his life, \s{artha},
\s{k\=ama}, \s{dharma}, \s{mok\,sa}. Entering into the householder stage to live
out his knowledge, he was able to serve there the three first human objects;
he satisfied his natural being and its interests and desire to take the joy of life,
he paid his debt to the society and its demands and by the way he discharged
his life functions he prepared himself for the last greatest purpose of his
existence. In the third stage he retired to the forest and worked out in a
certain seclusion the truth of his spirit. He lived in a broad freedom from the
stricter social bonds; but if he so willed, gathering the young around him or
receiving the inquirer and seeker, he could leave his knowledge to the new
rising generation as an educator or a spiritual teacher. In the last stage of life
he was free to throw off every remaining tie and to wander over the world in
an extreme spiritual detachment from all the forms of social life, satisfying
only the barest necessities, communing with the universal spirit, making his
soul ready for eternity. This circle was not obligatory on all. The great
majority never went beyond the two first stages; many passed away in the
\s{v\=anaprastha} or forest stage. Only the rare few made the last extreme
venture and took the life of the wandering recluse. But this profoundly
conceived cycle gave a scheme which kept the full course of the human spirit
in its view; it could be taken advantage of by all according to their
Page 175

actual growth and in its fullness by those who were sufficiently developed in
their present birth to complete the circle.
\par On this first firm and noble basis Indian civilisation grew to its maturity
and became a thing rich, splendid and unique. While it filled the view with the
last mountain prospect of a supreme spiritual elevation, it did not neglect the
life of the levels. It lived between the busy life of the city and village, the
freedom and seclusion of the forest and the last overarching illimitable ether.
Moving firmly between life and death it saw beyond both and cut out a
hundred high-roads to immortality. It developed the external nature and drew
it into the inner self; it enriched life to raise it into the spirit. Thus founded,
thus trained, the ancient Indian race grew to astonishing heights of culture
and civilisation; it lived with a noble, well-based, ample and vigorous order
and freedom; it developed a great literature, sciences, arts, crafts, industries;
it rose to the highest possible ideals and no mean practice of knowledge and
culture, of arduous greatness and heroism, of kindness, philanthropy and
human sympathy and oneness; it laid the inspired basis of wonderful spiritual
philosophies; it examined the secrets of external nature and discovered and
lived the boundless and miraculous truths of the inner being; it fathomed self
and understood and possessed the world. As the civilisation grew in richness
and complexity, it lost indeed the first grand simplicity of its early order. The
intellect towered and widened, but intuition waned or retreated into the hearts
of the saints and adepts and mystics. A greater stress came to be laid on
scientific system, accuracy and order, not only in all the things of the life and
mind, but even in the things of the spirit; the free flood of intuitive knowledge
was forced to run in hewn channels. Society became more artificial and
complex, less free and noble; more of a bond on the individual, it was less a
field for the growth of his spiritual faculties. The old fine integral harmony
gave place to an exaggerated stress on one or other of its elemental factors.
\s{Artha} and \s{k\=ama}, interest and desire were in some directions
developed at the expense of the \s{dharma}. The lines of the dharma were
filled and stamped in with so rigid a distinctness as to stand in the way of the
freedom of the spirit.
Page 176

Spiritual liberation was pursued in hostility to life and not as its full-orbed
result and high crowning. But still some strong basis of the old knowledge
remained to inspire, to harmonise, to keep alive the soul of India. Even when
deterioration came and a slow collapse, even when the life of the community
degenerated into an uneasily petrified ignorance and confusion, the old
spiritual aim and tradition remained to sweeten and humanise and save in its
worst days the Indian peoples. For we see that it continually swept back on
the race in new waves and high outbursts of life-giving energy or leaped up in
intense kindlings of the spiritualised mind or heart, even as it now rises once
more in all its strength to give the impulse of a great renascence.
Page 177

\par
\hn VII
\par
\ht Indian Spirituality and Life
\par\drop I have described the framework of the Indian idea from the outlook
of an intellectual criticism, because that is the standpoint of the critics who
affect to disparage its value. I have shown that Indian culture must be
adjudged even from this alien outlook to have been the creation of a wide and
noble spirit. Inspired in the heart of its being by a lofty principle, illumined
with a striking and uplifting idea of individual manhood and its powers and its
possible perfection, aligned to a spacious plan of social architecture, it was
enriched not only by a strong philosophic, intellectual and artistic creativeness
but by a great and vivifying and fruitful life-power. But this by itself does not
give an adequate account of its spirit or its greatness. One might describe
Greek or Roman civilisation from this outlook and miss little that was of
importance; but Indian civilisation was not only a great cultural system, but an
immense religious effort of the human spirit.
\par The whole root of difference between Indian and European culture
springs from the spiritual aim of Indian civilisation. It is the turn which this
aim imposes on all the rich and luxuriant variety of its forms and rhythms that
gives to it its unique character. For even what it has in common with other
cultures gets from that turn a stamp of striking originality and solitary
greatness. A spiritual aspiration was the governing force of this culture, its
core of thought, its ruling passion. Not only did it make spirituality the highest
aim of life, but it even tried, as far as that could be done in the past conditions
of the human race, to turn the whole of life towards spirituality. But since
religion is in the human mind the first native, if imperfect form of the spiritual
impulse, the predominance of the spiritual idea, its endeavour to take hold of
life, necessitated a casting of thought and action into the religious mould and a
persistent filling of every circumstance
Page 178

of life with the religious sense; it demanded a pervadingly religio-philosophic
culture. The highest spirituality indeed moves in a free and wide air far above
that lower stage of seeking which is governed by religious form and dogma; it
does not easily bear their limitations and, even when it admits, it transcends
them; it lives in an experience which to the formal religious mind is
unintelligible. But man does not arrive immediately at that highest inner
elevation and, if it were demanded from him at once, he would never arrive
there. At first he needs lower supports and stages of ascent; he asks for
some scaffolding of dogma, worship, image, sign, form, symbol, some
indulgence and permission of mixed half-natural motive on which he can
stand while he builds up in him the temple of the spirit. Only when the temple
is completed, can the supports be removed, the scaffolding disappear. The
religious culture which now goes by the name of Hinduism not only fulfilled
this purpose, but, unlike certain credal religions, it knew its purpose. It gave
itself no name, because it set itself no sectarian limits; it claimed no universal
adhesion, asserted no sole infallible dogma, set up no single narrow path or
gate of salvation; it was less a creed or cult than a continuously enlarging
tradition of the Godward endeavour of the human spirit. An immense
many-sided many-staged provision for a spiritual self-building and self-finding,
it had some right to speak of itself by the only name it knew, the eternal
religion, \s{san\=atana dharma}. It is only if we have a just and right
appreciation of this sense and spirit of Indian religion that we can come to an
understanding of the true sense and spirit of Indian culture.
\par Now just here is the first baffling difficulty over which the European
mind stumbles; for it finds itself unable to make out what Hindu religion is.
Where, it asks, is its soul? where is its mind and fixed thought? where is the
form of its body? How can there be a religion which has no rigid dogmas
demanding belief on pain of eternal damnation, no theological postulates, even
no fixed theology, no credo distinguishing it from antagonistic or rival
religions? How can there be a religion which has no papal head, no governing
ecclesiastic body, no church, chapel
Page 179

or congregational system, no binding religious form of any kind obligatory on
all its adherents, no one administration and discipline? For the Hindu priests
are mere ceremonial officiants without any ecclesiastical authority or
disciplinary powers and the Pundits are mere interpreters of the Shastra, not
the lawgivers of the religion or its rulers. How again can Hinduism be called
a religion when it admits all beliefs, allowing even a kind of high-reaching
atheism and agnosticism and permits all possible spiritual experiences, all
kinds of religious adventures? The only thing fixed, rigid, positive, clear is the
social law, and even that varies in different castes, regions, communities. The
caste rules and not the Church; but even the caste cannot punish a man for
his beliefs, ban heterodoxy or prevent his following a new revolutionary
doctrine or a new spiritual leader. If it excommunicates Christian or Muslim,
it is not for religious belief or practice, but because they break with the social
rule and order. It has been asserted in consequence that there is no such
thing as a Hindu religion, but only a Hindu social system with a bundle of the
most disparate religious beliefs and institutions. The precious dictum that
Hinduism is a mass of folk-lore with an ineffective coat of metaphysical
daubing is perhaps the final judgment of the superficial occidental mind on
this matter.
\par This misunderstanding springs from the total difference of outlook on
religion that divides the Indian mind and the normal Western intelligence. The
difference is so great that it could only be bridged by a supple philosophical
training or a wide spiritual culture; but the established forms of religion and
the rigid methods of philosophical thought practised in the West make no
provision and even allow no opportunity for either. To the Indian mind the
least important part of religion is its dogma; the religious spirit matters, not the
theological credo. On the contrary to the Western mind a fixed intellectual
belief is the most important part of a cult; it is its core of meaning, it is the
thing that distinguishes it from others. For it is its formulated beliefs that make
it either a true or a false religion, according as it agrees or does not agree
with the credo of its critic. This notion, however foolish and shallow, is a
necessary consequence
Page 180

of the Western idea which falsely supposes that intellectual truth is the
highest verity and, even, that there is no other. The Indian religious thinker
knows that all the highest eternal verities are truths of the spirit. The supreme
truths are neither the rigid conclusions of logical reasoning nor the
affirmations of credal statement, but fruits of the soul's inner experience.
Intellectual truth is only one of the doors to the outer precincts of the temple.
And since intellectual truth turned towards the Infinite must be in its very
nature many-sided and not narrowly one, the most varying intellectual beliefs
can be equally true because they mirror different facets of the Infinite.
However separated by intellectual distance, they still form so many
side-entrances which admit the mind to some faint ray from a supreme Light.
There are no true and false religions, but rather all religions are true in their
own way and degree. Each is one of the thousand paths to the One Eternal.
\par Indian religion placed four necessities before human life. First, it imposed
upon the mind a belief in a highest consciousness or state of existence
universal and transcendent of the universe, from which all comes, in which all
lives and moves without knowing it and of which all must one day grow
aware, returning towards that which is perfect, eternal and infinite. Next, it
laid upon the individual life the need of self-preparation by development and
experience till man is ready for an effort to grow consciously into the truth of
this greater existence. Thirdly, it provided it with a well-founded,
well-explored, many-branching and always enlarging way of knowledge and
of spiritual or religious discipline. Lastly, for those not yet ready for these
higher steps it provided an organisation of the individual and collective life, a
framework of personal and social discipline and conduct, of mental and moral
and vital development by which they could move each in his own limits and
according to his own nature in such a way as to become eventually ready for
the greater existence. The first three of these elements are the most essential
to any religion, but Hinduism has always attached to the last also a great
importance; it has left out no part of life as a thing secular and foreign to the
religious and spiritual life. Still the
Page 181

Indian religious tradition is not merely the form of a religio-social system, as
the ignorant critic vainly imagines. However greatly that may count at the
moment of a social departure, however stubbornly the conservative religious
mind may oppose all pronounced or drastic change, still the core of Hinduism
is a spiritual, not a social discipline. Actually we find religions like Sikhism
counted in the Vedic family although they broke down the old social tradition
and invented a novel form, while the Jains and Buddhists were traditionally
considered to be outside the religious fold although they observed Hindu
social custom and intermarried with Hindus, because their spiritual system
and teaching figured in its origin as a denial of the truth of Veda and a
departure from the continuity of the Vedic line. In all these four elements that
constitute Hinduism there are major and minor differences between Hindus
of various sects, schools, communities and races; but nevertheless there is
also a general unity of spirit, of fundamental type and form and of spiritual
temperament which creates in this vast fluidity an immense force of cohesion
and a strong principle of oneness.
\par The fundamental idea of all Indian religion is one common to the highest
human thinking everywhere. The supreme truth of all that is is a Being or an
existence beyond the mental and physical appearances we contact here.
Beyond mind, life and body there is a Spirit and Self containing all that is
finite and infinite, surpassing all that is relative, a supreme Absolute,
originating and supporting all that is transient, a one Eternal. A one
transcendent, universal, original and sempiternal Divinity or divine Essence,
Consciousness, Force and Bliss is the fount and continent and inhabitant of
things. Soul, nature, life are only a manifestation or partial phenomenon of this
self-aware Eternity and this conscious Eternal. But this Truth of being was
not seized by the Indian mind only as a philosophical speculation, a theological
dogma, an abstraction contemplated by the intelligence. It was not an idea to
be indulged by the thinker in his study, but otherwise void of practical bearing
on life. It was not a mystic sublimation which could be ignored in the dealings
of man with the world and Nature. It was a living spiritual
Page 182

Truth, an Entity, a Power, a Presence that could be sought by all according to
their degree of capacity and seized in a thousand ways through life and
beyond life. This Truth was to be lived and even to be made the governing
idea of thought and life and action. This recognition and pursuit of something
or someone Supreme is behind all forms the one universal credo of Indian
religion, and if it has taken a hundred shapes, it was precisely because it was
so much alive. The Infinite alone justifies the existence of the finite and the
finite by itself has no entirely separate value or independent existence. Life, if
it is not an illusion, is a divine Play, a manifestation of the glory of the Infinite.
Or it is a means by which the soul growing in Nature through countless forms
and many lives can approach, touch, feel and unite itself through love and
knowledge and faith and adoration and a Godward will in works with this
transcendent Being and this infinite Existence. This Self or this self-existent
Being is the one supreme reality, and all things else are either only
appearances or only true by dependence upon it. It follows that
self-realisation and God-realisation are the great business of the living and
thinking human being. All life and thought are in the end a means of progress
towards self-realisation and God-realisation.
\par Indian religion never considered intellectual or theological conceptions
about the supreme Truth to be the one thing of central importance. To pursue
that Truth under whatever conception or whatever form, to attain to it by
inner experience, to live in it in consciousness, this it held to be the sole thing
needful. One school or sect might consider the real self of man to be
indivisibly one with the universal Self or the supreme Spirit. Another might
regard man as one with the Divine in essence but different from him in
Nature. A third might hold God, Nature and the individual soul in man to be
three eternally different powers of being. But for all the truth of Self held
with equal force; for even to the Indian dualist God is the supreme self and
reality in whom and by whom Nature and man live, move and have their
being and, if you eliminate God from his view of things, Nature and man
would lose for him all their meaning
Page 183

and importance. The Spirit, universal Nature (whether called Maya, Prakriti
or Shakti) and the soul in living beings, Jiva, are the three truths which are
universally admitted by all the many religious sects and conflicting religious
philosophies of India. Universal also is the admission that the discovery of the
inner spiritual self in man, the divine soul in him, and some kind of living and
uniting contact or absolute unity of the soul in man with God or supreme Self
or eternal Brahman is the condition of spiritual perfection. It is open to us to
conceive and have experience of the Divine as an impersonal Absolute and
Infinite or to approach and know and feel Him as a transcendent and
universal sempiternal Person: but whatever be our way of reaching him, the
one important truth of spiritual experience is that he is in the heart and centre
of all existence and all existence is in him and to find him is the great
self-finding. Differences of credal belief are to the Indian mind nothing more
than various ways of seeing the one Self and Godhead in all. Self-realisation
is the one thing needful; to open to the inner Spirit, to live in the Infinite, to
seek after and discover the Eternal, to be in union with God, that is the
common idea and aim of religion, that is the sense of spiritual salvation, that is
the living Truth that fulfils and releases. This dynamic following after the
highest spiritual truth and the highest spiritual aim are the uniting bond of
Indian religion and, behind all its thousand forms, its one common essence.
\par If there were nothing else to be said in favour of the spiritual genius of
the Indian people or the claim of Indian civilisation to stand in the front rank
as a spiritual culture, it would be sufficiently substantiated by this single fact
that not only was this greatest and widest spiritual truth seen in India with the
boldest largeness, felt and expressed with a unique intensity, and approached
from all possible sides, but it was made consciously the grand uplifting idea of
life, the core of all thinking, the foundation of all religion, the secret sense and
declared ultimate aim of human existence. The truth announced is not
peculiar to Indian thinking; it has been seen and followed by the highest minds
and souls everywhere. But elsewhere it has been the
Page 184

living guide only of a few thinkers, or of some rare mystics or exceptionally
gifted spiritual natures. The mass of men have had no understanding, no
distant perception, not even a reflected glimpse of this something Beyond;
they have lived only in the lower sectarian side of religion, in inferior ideas of
the Deity or in the outward mundane aspects of life. But Indian culture did
succeed by the strenuousness of its vision, the universality of its approach,
the intensity of its seeking in doing what has been done by no other culture. It
succeeded in stamping religion with the essential ideal of a real spirituality; it
brought some living reflection of the very highest spiritual truth and some
breath of its influence into every part of the religious field. Nothing can be
more untrue than to pretend that the general religious mind of India has not at
all grasped the higher spiritual or metaphysical truths of Indian religion. It is a
sheer falsehood or a wilful misunderstanding to say that it has lived always in
the externals only of rite and creed and shibboleth. On the contrary, the main
metaphysical truths of Indian religious philosophy in their broad idea-aspects
or in an intensely poetic and dynamic representation have been stamped on
the general mind of the people. The ideas of Maya, Lila, divine Immanence
are as familiar to the man in the street and the worshipper in the temple as to
the philosopher in his seclusion, the monk in his monastery and the saint in his
hermitage. The spiritual reality which they reflect, the profound experience to
which they point, has permeated the religion, the literature, the art, even the
popular religious songs of a whole people.
\par It is true that these things are realised by the mass of men more readily
through the fervour of devotion than by a strenuous effort of thinking; but that
is as it must and should be since the heart of man is nearer to the Truth than
his intelligence. It is true, too, that the tendency to put too much stress on
externals has always been there and worked to overcloud the deeper spiritual
motive; but that is not peculiar to India, it is a common failing of human
nature, not less but rather more evident in Europe than in Asia. It has needed
a constant stream of saints and religious thinkers and the teaching of
illuminated Sannyasins to keep the
Page 185

reality vivid and resist the deadening weight of form and ceremony and ritual.
But the fact remains that these messengers of the spirit have never been
wanting. And the still more significant fact remains that there has never been
wanting either a happy readiness in the common mind to listen to the
message. The ordinary materialised souls, the external minds are the majority
in India as everywhere. How easy it is for the superior European critic to
forget this common fact of our humanity and treat this turn as a peculiar sin
of the Indian mentality! But at least the people of India, even the “ignorant
masses” have this distinction that they are by centuries of training nearer to
the inner realities, are divided from them by a less thick veil of the universal
ignorance and are more easily led back to a vital glimpse of God and Spirit,
self and eternity than the mass of men or even the cultured elite anywhere
else. Where else could the lofty, austere and difficult teaching of a Buddha
have seized so rapidly on the popular mind? Where else could the songs of a
Tukaram, a Ramprasad, a Kabir, the Sikh gurus and the chants of the Tamil
saints with their fervid devotion but also their profound spiritual thinking have
found so speedy an echo and formed a popular religious literature? This
strong permeation or close nearness of the spiritual turn, this readiness of the
mind of a whole nation to turn to the highest realities is the sign and fruit of
an age-long, a real and a still living and supremely spiritual culture.
\par The endless variety of Indian philosophy and religion seems to the
European mind interminable, bewildering, wearisome, useless; it is unable to
see the forest because of the richness and luxuriance of its vegetation; it
misses the common spiritual life in the multitude of its forms. But this infinite
variety is itself, as Vivekananda pertinently pointed out, a sign of a superior
religious culture. The Indian mind has always realised that the Supreme is the
Infinite; it has perceived, right from its Vedic beginnings, that to the soul in
Nature the Infinite must always present itself in an endless variety of
aspects. The mentality of the West has long cherished the aggressive and
quite illogical idea of a single religion for all mankind, a religion universal by
the very force of its narrowness, one set of dogmas, one
Page 186

cult, one system of ceremonies, one array of prohibitions and injunctions, one
ecclesiastical ordinance. That narrow absurdity prances about as the one true
religion which all must accept on peril of persecution by men here and
spiritual rejection or fierce eternal punishment by God in other worlds. This
grotesque creation of human unreason, the parent of so much intolerance,
cruelty, obscurantism and aggressive fanaticism, has never been able to take
firm hold of the free and supple mind of India. Men everywhere have
common human failings, and intolerance and narrowness especially in the
matter of observances there has been and is in India. There has been much
violence of theological disputation, there have been querulous bickerings of
sects with their pretensions to spiritual superiority and greater knowledge, and
sometimes, at one time especially in southern India in a period of acute
religious differences, there have been brief local outbreaks of active mutual
tyranny and persecution even unto death. But these things have never taken
the proportions which they assumed in Europe. Intolerance has been confined
for the most part to the minor forms of polemical attack or to social
obstruction or ostracism; very seldom have they transgressed across the line
to the major forms of barbaric persecution which draw a long, red and
hideous stain across the religious history of Europe. There has played ever in
India the saving perception of a higher and purer spiritual intelligence, which
has had its effect on the mass mentality. Indian religion has always felt that
since the minds, the temperaments, the intellectual affinities of men are
unlimited in their variety, a perfect liberty of thought and of worship must be
allowed to the individual in his approach to the Infinite.
\par India recognised authority of spiritual experience and knowledge, but she
recognised still more the need of variety of spiritual experience and
knowledge. Even in the days of decline when the claim of authority became
in too many directions rigorous and excessive, she still kept the saving
perception that there could not be one but must be many authorities. An alert
readiness to acknowledge new light capable of enlarging the old tradition has
always been characteristic of the religious
Page 187

mind in India. Indian civilisation did not develop to a last logical conclusion its
earlier political and social liberties,—that greatness of freedom or boldness of
experiment belongs to the West; but liberty of religious practice and a
complete freedom of thought in religion as in every other matter have always
counted among its constant traditions. The atheist and the agnostic were free
from persecution in India. Buddhism and Jainism might be disparaged as
unorthodox religions, but they were allowed to live freely side by side with the
orthodox creeds and philosophies; in her eager thirst for truth she gave them
their full chance, tested all their values, and as much of their truth as was
assimilable was taken into the stock of the common and always enlarging
continuity of her spiritual experience. That ageless continuity was carefully
conserved, but it admitted light from all quarters. In latter times the saints
who reached some fusion of the Hindu and the Islamic teaching were freely
and immediately recognised as leaders of Hindu religion,—even, in some
cases, when they started with a Mussulman birth and from the Mussulman
standpoint. The Yogin who developed a new path of Yoga, the religious
teacher who founded a new order, the thinker who built up a novel statement
of the many-sided truth of spiritual existence, found no serious obstacle to
their practice or their propaganda. At most they had to meet the opposition of
the priest and pundit instinctively adverse to any change; but this had only to
be lived down for the new element to be received into the free and pliant
body of the national religion and its ever plastic order.
\par The necessity of a firm spiritual order as well as an untrammelled
spiritual freedom was always perceived; but it was provided for in various
ways and not in any one formal, external or artificial manner. It was founded
in the first place on the recognition of an ever enlarging number of authorised
scriptures. Of these scriptures some like the Gita possessed a common and
widespread authority, others were peculiar to sects or schools: some like the
Vedas were supposed to have an absolute, others a relative binding force.
But the very largest freedom of interpretation was allowed, and this
prevented any of these authoritative
Page 188

books from being turned into an instrument of ecclesiastical tyranny or a
denial of freedom to the human mind and spirit. Another instrument of order
was the power of family and communal tradition, \s{kuladharma}, persistent
but not immutable. A third was the religious authority of the Brahmins; as
priests they officiated as the custodians of observance, as scholars, acting in
a much more important and respected role than the officiating priesthood
could claim,—for to the priesthood no great consideration was given in
India,—they stood as the exponents of religious tradition and were a strong
conservative power. Finally, and most characteristically, most powerfully,
order was secured by the succession of Gurus or spiritual teachers,
\s{parampar\=a}, who preserved the continuity of each spiritual system and
handed it down from generation to generation but were empowered also,
unlike the priest and the Pundit, to enrich freely its significance and develop
its practice. A living and moving, not a rigid continuity, was the characteristic
turn of the inner religious mind of India. The evolution of the Vaishnava
religion from very early times, its succession of saints and teachers, the
striking developments given to it successively by Ramanuja, Madhwa,
Chaitanya, Vallabhacharya and its recent stirrings of survival after a period
of languor and of some fossilisation form one notable example of this firm
combination of agelong continuity and fixed tradition with latitude of powerful
and vivid change. A more striking instance was the founding of the Sikh
religion, its long line of Gurus and the novel direction and form given to it by
Guru Govind Singh in the democratic institution of the Khalsa. The Buddhist
Sangha and its councils, the creation of a sort of divided pontifical authority
by Shankaracharya, an authority transmitted from generation to generation
for more than a thousand years and even now not altogether effete, the Sikh
Khalsa, the adoption of the congregational form called Samaj by the modern
reforming sects indicate an attempt towards a compact and stringent order.
But it is noteworthy that even in these attempts the freedom and plasticity
and living sincerity of the religious mind of India always prevented it from
initiating anything like the overblown ecclesiastical orders and despotic
Page 189

hierarchies which in the West have striven to impose the tyranny of their
obscurantist yoke on the spiritual liberty of the human race.
\par The instinct for order and freedom at once in any field of human activity
is always a sign of a high natural capacity in that field, and a people which
could devise such a union of unlimited religious liberty with an always orderly
religious evolution, must be credited with a high religious capacity, even as
they cannot be denied its inevitable fruit, a great, ancient and still living
spiritual culture. It is this absolute freedom of thought and experience and this
provision of a framework sufficiently flexible and various to ensure liberty
and yet sufficiently sure and firm to be the means of a stable and powerful
evolution that have given to Indian civilisation this wonderful and seemingly
eternal religion with its marvellous wealth of many-sided philosophies, of
great scriptures, of profound religious works, of religions that approach the
Eternal from every side of his infinite Truth, of Yoga-systems of
psycho-spiritual discipline and self-finding, of suggestive forms, symbols and
ceremonies which are strong to train the mind at all stages of development
towards the Godward endeavour. Its firm structure capable of supporting
without peril a large tolerance and assimilative spirit, its vivacity, intensity,
profundity and multitudinousness of experience, its freedom from the
unnatural European divorce between mundane knowledge and science on the
one side and religion on the other, its reconciliation of the claims of the
intellect with the claims of the spirit, its long endurance and infinite capacity
of revival make it stand out today as the most remarkable, rich and living of
all religious systems. The nineteenth century has thrown on it its tremendous
shock of negation and scepticism but has not been able to destroy its assured
roots of spiritual knowledge. A little disturbed for a brief moment, surprised
and temporarily shaken by this attack in a period of greatest depression of the
nation's vital force, India revived almost at once and responded by a fresh
outburst of spiritual activity, seeking, assimilation, formative effort. A great
new life is visibly preparing in her, a mighty transformation and farther
dynamic evolution and potent march forward into the
Page 190

inexhaustible infinities of spiritual experience.
\par The many-sided plasticity of Indian cult and spiritual experience is the
native sign of its truth, its living reality, the unfettered sincerity of its search
and finding; but this plasticity is a constant stumbling block to the European
mind. The religious thinking of Europe is accustomed to rigid impoverishing
definitions, to strict exclusions, to a constant preoccupation with the outward
idea, the organisation, the form. A precise creed framed by the logical or
theological intellect, a strict and definite moral code to fix the conduct, a
bundle of observances and ceremonies, a firm ecclesiastical or
congregational organisation, that is Western religion. Once the spirit is safely
imprisoned and chained up in these things, some emotional fervours and even
a certain amount of mystic seeking can be tolerated—within rational limits;
but, after all, it is perhaps safest to do without these dangerous spices.
Trained in these conceptions, the European critic comes to India and is struck
by the immense mass and intricacy of a polytheistic cult crowned at its
summit by a belief in the one Infinite. This belief he erroneously supposes to
be identical with the barren and abstract intellectual pantheism of the West.
He applies with an obstinate prejudgment the ideas and definitions of his own
thinking, and this illegitimate importation has fixed many false values on
Indian spiritual conceptions,—unhappily, even in the mind of “educated”
India. But where our religion eludes his fixed standards, misunderstanding,
denunciation and supercilious condemnation come at once to his rescue. The
Indian mind on the contrary is averse to intolerant mental exclusions; for a
great force of intuition and inner experience had given it from the beginning
that towards which the mind of the West is only now reaching with much
fumbling and difficulty,—the cosmic consciousness, the cosmic vision. Even
when it sees the One without a second, it still admits his duality of Spirit and
Nature; it leaves room for his many trinities and million aspects. Even when it
concentrates on a single limiting aspect of the Divinity and seems to see
nothing but that, it still keeps instinctively at the back of its consciousness the
sense of the All and the idea of the One. Even when it distributes its worship
among
Page 191

many objects, it looks at the same time through the objects of its worship and
sees beyond the multitude of godheads the unity of the Supreme. This
synthetic turn is not peculiar to the mystics or to a small literate class or to
philosophic thinkers nourished on the high sublimities of the Veda and
Vedanta. It permeates the popular mind nourished on the thoughts, images,
traditions and cultural symbols of the Purana and Tantra; for these things are
only concrete representations or living figures of the synthetic monism, the
many-sided unitarianism, the large cosmic universalism of the Vedic
scriptures.
\par Indian religion founded itself on the conception of a timeless, nameless
and formless Supreme, but it did not feel called upon, like the narrower and
more ignorant monotheisms of the younger races, to deny or abolish all
intermediary forms and names and powers and personalities of the Eternal
and Infinite. A colourless monism or a pale vague transcendental Theism was
not its beginning, its middle and its end. The one Godhead is worshipped as
the All, for all in the universe is he or made out of his being or his nature. But
Indian religion is not therefore pantheism; for beyond this universality it
recognises the supracosmic Eternal. Indian polytheism is not the popular
polytheism of ancient Europe; for here the worshipper of many gods still
knows that all his divinities are forms, names, personalities and powers of the
One; his gods proceed from the one Purusha, his goddesses are energies of
the one divine Force. Those ways of Indian cult which most resemble a
popular form of Theism, are still something more; for they do not exclude, but
admit the many aspects of God. Indian image-worship is not the idolatry of a
barbaric or undeveloped mind; for even the most ignorant know that the
image is a symbol and support and can throw it away when its use is over.
The later religious forms which most felt the impress of the Islamic idea, like
Nanak's worship of the timeless One, Akala, and the reforming creeds of
today, born under the influence of the West, yet draw away from the
limitations of Western or Semitic monotheism. Irresistibly they turn from
these infantile conceptions towards the fathomless truth of Vedanta. The
divine Personality of God and his human relations with
Page 192

man are strongly stressed by Vaishnavism and Shaivism as the most dynamic
Truth; but that is not the whole of these religions, and this divine Personality
is not the limited magnified-human personal God of the West. Indian religion
cannot be described by any of the definitions known to the occidental
intelligence. In its totality it has been a free and tolerant synthesis of all
spiritual worship and experience. Observing the one Truth from all its many
sides, it shut out none. It gave itself no specific name and bound itself by no
limiting distinction. Allowing separative designations for its constituting cults
and divisions, it remained itself nameless, formless, universal, infinite, like the
Brahman of its agelong seeking. Although strikingly distinguished from other
creeds by its traditional scriptures, cults and symbols, it is not in its essential
character a credal religion at all but a vast and many-sided, an always
unifying and always progressive and self-enlarging system of spiritual
culture.
\note{The only religion that India has apparently rejected in the end, is
Buddhism; but in fact this appearance is a historical error. Buddhism lost its
separative force, because its spiritual substance, as opposed to its credal
parts, was absorbed by the religious mind of Hindu India. Even so, it survived
in the North and was exterminated not by Shankaracharya or another, but by
the invading force of Islam.}
\par It is necessary to emphasise this synthetic character and embracing unity
of the Indian religious mind, because otherwise we miss the whole meaning
of Indian life and the whole sense of Indian culture. It is only by recognising
this broad and plastic character that we can understand its total effect on the
life of the community and the life of the individual. And if we are asked, “But
after all what is Hinduism, what does it teach, what does it practise, what are
its common factors?” we can answer that Indian religion is founded upon
three basic ideas or rather three fundamentals of a highest and widest
spiritual experience. First comes the idea of the One Existence of the Veda
to whom sages give different names, the One without a second of the
Upanishads who is all that is and beyond all that is, the Permanent of the
Buddhists, the Absolute of the Illusionists, the supreme God or Purusha of the
Theists who holds in his power the soul and Nature,—in a word the Eternal,
the Infinite. This
Page 193

is the first common foundation; but it can be and is expressed in an endless
variety of formulas by the human intelligence. To discover and closely
approach and enter into whatever kind or degree of unity with this
Permanent, this Infinite, this Eternal, is the highest height and last effort of its
spiritual experience. That is the first universal {\it credo} of the religious mind
of India.
\par Admit in whatever formula this foundation, follow this great spiritual aim
by one of the thousand paths recognised in India or even any new path which
branches off from them and you are at the core of the religion. For its second
basic idea is the manifold way of man's approach to the Eternal and Infinite.
The Infinite is full of many infinities and each of these infinities is itself the
very Eternal. And here in the limitations of the cosmos God manifests himself
and fulfils himself in the world in many ways, but each is the way of the
Eternal. For in each finite we can discover and through all things as his forms
and symbols we can approach the Infinite; all cosmic powers are
manifestations, all forces are forces of the One. The gods behind the
workings of Nature are to be seen and adored as powers, names and
personalities of the one Godhead. An infinite Conscious-Force, executive
Energy, Will or Law, Maya, Prakriti, Shakti or Karma, is behind all
happenings, whether to us they seem good or bad, acceptable or
inacceptable, fortunate or adverse. The Infinite creates and is Brahma; it
preserves and is Vishnu; it destroys or takes to itself and is Rudra or Shiva.
The supreme Energy beneficent in upholding and protection is or else
formulates itself as the Mother of the worlds, Luxmi or Durga. Or beneficent
even in the mask of destruction, it is Chandi or it is Kali, the dark Mother.
The One Godhead manifests himself in the form of his qualities in various
names and godheads. The God of divine love of the Vaishnava, the God of
divine power of the Shakta appear as two different godheads; but in truth
they are the one infinite Deity in different figures.
\note{This explanation of Indian polytheism is not a modern invention created
to meet Western reproaches; it is to be found explicitly stated in the Gita; it is,
still earlier, the sense of the Upanishads; it was clearly stated in so many
words in the first ancient days by the “primitive” poets (in truth the profound
mystics) of the Veda.} One may
Page 194

approach the Supreme through any of these names and forms, with
knowledge or in ignorance; for through them and beyond them we can
proceed at last to the supreme experience.
\par One thing however has to be noted that while many modernised Indian
religionists tend, by way of an intellectual compromise with modern
materialistic rationalism, to explain away these things as symbols, the ancient
Indian religious mentality saw them not only as symbols but as
world-realities,—even if to the Illusionist realities only of the world of Maya.
For between the highest unimaginable Existence and our material way of
being the spiritual and psychic knowledge of India did not fix a gulf as
between two unrelated opposites. It was aware of other psychological planes
of consciousness and experience and the truths of these supraphysical planes
were no less real to it than the outward truths of the material universe. Man
approaches God at first according to his psychological nature and his capacity
for deeper experience, \s{svabh\=ava}, \s{adhik\=ara}. The level of Truth, the
plane of consciousness he can reach is determined by his inner evolutionary
stage. Thence comes the variety of religious cult, but its data are not
imaginary structures, inventions of priests or poets, but truths of a
supraphysical existence intermediate between the consciousness of the
physical world and the ineffable superconscience of the Absolute.
\par The third idea of strongest consequence at the base of Indian religion is
the most dynamic for the inner spiritual life. It is that while the Supreme or
the Divine can be approached through a universal consciousness and by
piercing through all inner and outer Nature, That or He can be met by each
individual soul in itself, in its own spiritual part, because there is something in
it that is intimately one or at least intimately related with the one divine
Existence. The essence of Indian religion is to aim at so growing and so living
that we can grow out of the Ignorance which veils this self-knowledge from
our mind and life and become aware of the Divinity within us. These three
things put together are the whole of Hindu religion, its essential sense and, if
any credo is needed, its credo.
Page 195

\par
\hn VIII
\par
\ht Indian Spirituality and Life–2
\par\drop The task of religion and spirituality is to mediate between God and
man, between the Eternal and Infinite and this transient, yet persistent finite,
between a luminous Truth-consciousness not expressed or not yet expressed
here and the Mind's ignorance. But nothing is more difficult than to bring
home the greatness and uplifting power of the spiritual consciousness to the
natural man forming the vast majority of the race; for his mind and senses
are turned outward towards the external calls of life and its objects and never
inwards to the Truth which lies behind them. This external vision and
attraction are the essence of the universal blinding force which is designated
in Indian philosophy the Ignorance. Ancient Indian spirituality recognised that
man lives in the Ignorance and has to be led through its imperfect indications
to a highest inmost knowledge. Our life moves between two worlds, the
depths upon depths of our inward being and the surface field of our outward
nature. The majority of men put the whole emphasis of life on the outward
and live very strongly in their surface consciousness and very little in the
inward existence. Even the choice spirits raised from the grossness of the
common vital and physical mould by the stress of thought and culture do not
usually get farther than a strong dwelling on the things of the mind. The
highest flight they reach—and it is this that the West persistently mistakes for
spirituality—is a preference for living in the mind and emotions more than in
the gross outward life or else an attempt to subject this rebellious life-stuff to
the law of intellectual truth or ethical reason and will or aesthetic beauty or of
all three together. But spiritual knowledge perceives that there is a greater
thing in us; our inmost self, our real being is not the intellect, not the aesthetic,
ethical or thinking mind, but the divinity within, the Spirit, and these other
things are only the instruments of the
Page 196

Spirit. A mere intellectual, ethical and aesthetic culture does not go back to
the inmost truth of the spirit; it is still an Ignorance, an incomplete, outward
and superficial knowledge. To have made the discovery of our deepest being
and hidden spiritual nature is the first necessity and to have erected the living
of an inmost spiritual life into the aim of existence is the characteristic sign of
a spiritual culture.
\par This endeavour takes in certain religions the form of a spiritual
exclusiveness which revolts from the outward existence rather than seeks to
transform it. The main tendency of the Christian discipline was not only to
despise the physical and vital way of living, but to disparage and imprison the
intellectual and distrust and discourage the aesthetic thirsts of our nature. It
emphasised against them a limited spiritual emotionalism and its intense
experiences as the one thing needful; the development of the ethical sense
was the sole mental necessity, its translation into act the sole indispensable
condition or result of the spiritual life. Indian spirituality reposed on too wide
and many-sided a culture to admit as its base this narrow movement; but on
its more solitary summits, at least in its later period, it tended to a spiritual
exclusiveness loftier in vision, but even more imperative and excessive. A
spirituality of this intolerant high-pointed kind, to whatever elevation it may
rise, however it may help to purify life or lead to a certain kind of individual
salvation, cannot be a complete thing. For its exclusiveness imposes on it a
certain impotence to deal effectively with the problems of human existence; it
cannot lead it to its integral perfection or combine its highest heights with its
broadest broadness. A wider spiritual culture must recognise that the Spirit is
not only the highest and inmost thing, but all is manifestation and creation of
the Spirit. It must have a wider outlook, a more embracing range of
applicability and, even, a more aspiring and ambitious aim of its endeavour.
Its aim must be not only to raise to inaccessible heights the few elect, but to
draw all men and all life and the whole human being upward, to spiritualise
life and in the end to divinise human nature. Not only must it be able to lay
hold on his deepest individual being but to inspire too his communal
Page 197

\NH existence. It must turn by a spiritual change all the members of his
ignorance into members of the knowledge; it must transmute all the
instruments of the human into instruments of a divine living. The total
movement of Indian spirituality is towards this aim; in spite of all the
difficulties, imperfections and fluctuations of its evolution, it had this
character. But like other cultures it was not at all times and in all its parts and
movements consciously aware of its own total significance. This large sense
sometimes emerged into something like a conscious synthetic clarity, but was
more often kept in the depths and on the surface dispersed in a multitude of
subordinate and special stand-points. Still, it is only by an intelligence of the
total drift that its manifold sides and rich variations of effort and teaching and
discipline can receive their full reconciling unity and be understood in the light
of its own most intrinsic purpose.
\par Now the spirit of Indian religion and spiritual culture has been
persistently and immovably the same throughout the long time of its vigour,
but its form has undergone remarkable changes. Yet if we look into them
from the right centre it will be apparent that these changes are the results of
a logical and inevitable evolution inherent in the very process of man's growth
towards the heights. In its earliest form, its first Vedic system, it took its
outward foundation on the mind of the physical man whose natural faith is in
things physical, in the sensible and visible objects, presences, representations
and the external pursuits and aims of this material world. The means,
symbols, rites, figures, by which it sought to mediate between the spirit and
the normal human mentality were drawn from these most external physical
things. Man's first and primitive idea of the Divine can only come through his
vision of external Nature and the sense of a superior Power or Powers
concealed behind her phenomena, veiled in the heaven and earth, father and
mother of our being, in the sun and moon and stars, its lights and regulators, in
dawn and day and night and rain and wind and storm, the oceans and the
rivers and the forests, all the circumstances and forces of her scene of
action, all that vast and mysterious surrounding life of which we are a part
and
Page 198

in which the natural heart and mind of the human creature feel instinctively
through whatever bright or dark or confused figures that there is here some
divine Multitude or else mighty Infinite, one, manifold and mysterious, which
takes these forms and manifests itself in these motions. The Vedic religion
took this natural sense and feeling of the physical man; it used the
conceptions to which they gave birth, and it sought to lead him through them
to the psychic and spiritual truths of his own being and the being of the
cosmos. It recognised that he was right when he saw behind the
manifestations of Nature great living powers and godheads, even though he
knew not their inner truth, and right too in offering to them worship and
propitiation and atonement. For that inevitably must be the initial way in
which his active physical, vital and mental nature is allowed to approach the
Godhead. He approaches it through its visible outward manifestations as
something greater than his own natural self, something single or multiple that
guides, sustains and directs his life, and he calls to it for help and support in
the desires and difficulties and distresses and struggles of his human
existence.
\note{The Gita recognises four kinds or degrees of worshippers and
God-seekers. There are first the \s{arth\=arth\=i} and \s{\=arta}, those who seek
him for the fulfilment of desire and those who turn for divine help in the
sorrow and suffering of existence; there is next the \s{jij\~n\=asu}, the seeker of
knowledge, the questioner who is moved to seek the Divine in his truth and in
that to meet him; last and highest, there is the \s{j\~n\=an\=i} who has already
contact with the truth and is able to live in unity with the Spirit.} The Vedic
religion accepted also the form in which early man everywhere expressed his
sense of the relation between himself and the godheads of Nature; it adopted
as its central symbol the act and ritual of a physical sacrifice. However crude
the notions attached to it, this idea of the necessity of sacrifice did express
obscurely a first law of being. For it was founded on that secret of constant
interchange between the individual and the universal powers of the cosmos
which covertly supports all the process of life and develops the action of
Nature.
\par But even in its external or exoteric side the Vedic religion did not limit
itself to this acceptance and regulation of the first
Page 199

religious notions of the natural physical mind of man. The Vedic Rishis gave
a psychic function to the godheads worshipped by the people; they spoke to
them of a higher Truth, Right, Law of which the gods were the guardians, of
the necessity of a truer knowledge and a larger inner living according to this
Truth and Right and of a home of Immortality to which the soul of man could
ascend by the power of Truth and of right doing. The people no doubt took
these ideas in their most external sense; but they were trained by them to
develop their ethical nature, to turn towards some initial development of their
psychic being, to conceive the idea of a knowledge and truth other than that
of the physical life and to admit even a first conception of some greater
spiritual Reality which was the ultimate object of human worship or
aspiration. This religious and moral force was the highest reach of the
external cult and the most that could be understood or followed by the mass
of the people.
\par The deeper truth of these things was reserved for the initiates, for those
who were ready to understand and practise the inner sense, the esoteric
meaning hidden in the Vedic scripture. For the Veda is full of words which,
as the Rishis themselves express it, are secret words that give their inner
meaning only to the seer, \sforced{kavaye nivacan\=a ni\,ny\=a vac\=a\.msi}. This is a
feature of the ancient sacred hymns which grew obscure to later ages; it
became a dead tradition and has been entirely ignored by modern scholarship
in its laborious attempt to read the hieroglyph of the Vedic symbols. Yet its
recognition is essential to a right understanding of almost all the ancient
religions; for mostly they started on their upward curve through an esoteric
element of which the key was not given to all. In all or most there was a
surface cult for the common physical man who was held yet unfit for the
psychic and spiritual life and an inner secret of the Mysteries carefully
disguised by symbols whose sense was opened only to the initiates. This was
the origin of the later distinction between the Shudra, the undeveloped
physical-minded man, and the twice-born, those who were capable of
entering into the second birth by initiation and to whom alone the Vedic
education could be given without danger. This too actuated the
Page 200

later prohibition of any reading or teaching of the Veda by the Shudra. It was
this inner meaning, it was the higher psychic and spiritual truths concealed by
the outer sense, that gave to these hymns the name by which they are still
known, the Veda, the Book of Knowledge. Only by penetrating into the
esoteric sense of this worship can we understand the full flowering of the
Vedic religion in the Upanishads and in the long later evolution of Indian
spiritual seeking and experience. For it is all there in its luminous seed,
preshadowed or even prefigured in the verses of the early seers. The
persistent notion which through every change ascribed the foundation of all
our culture to the Rishis, whatever its fabulous forms and mythical
ascriptions, contains a real truth and veils a sound historic tradition. It reflects
the fact of a true initiation and an unbroken continuity between this great
primitive past and the riper but hardly greater spiritual development of our
historic culture.
\par This inner Vedic religion started with an extension of the psychic
significance of the godheads in the Cosmos. Its primary notion was that of a
hierarchy of worlds, an ascending stair of planes of being in the universe. It
saw a mounting scale of the worlds corresponding to a similar mounting scale
of planes or degrees or levels of consciousness in the nature of man. A
Truth, Right and Law sustains and governs all these levels of Nature; one in
essence, it takes in them different but cognate forms. There is for instance
the series of the outer physical light, another higher and inner light which is
the vehicle of the mental, vital and psychic consciousness and a highest
inmost light of spiritual illumination. Surya, the Sun-God, was the lord of the
physical Sun; but he is at the same time to the Vedic seer-poet the giver of
the rays of knowledge which illumine the mind and he is too the soul and
energy and body of the spiritual illumination. And in all these powers he is a
luminous form of the one and infinite Godhead. All the Vedic godheads have
this outer and this inner and inmost function, their known and their secret
Names. All are in their external character powers of physical Nature; all
have in their inner meaning a psychic function and psychological ascriptions;
all too are various powers of some one
Page 201

highest Reality, \s{eka\.m sat}, the one infinite Existence. This hardly
knowable Supreme is called often in the Veda “That Truth” or “That One”,
\s{tat satyam}, \s{tad ekam}. This complex character of the Vedic godheads
assumes forms which have been wholly misunderstood by those who ascribe
to them only their outward physical significance. Each of these gods is in
himself a complete and separate cosmic personality of the one Existence and
in their combination of powers they form the complete universal power, the
cosmic whole, \s{vai\'svadevyam}. Each again, apart from his special function,
is one godhead with the others; each holds in himself the universal divinity,
each god is all the other gods. This is the aspect of the Vedic teaching and
worship to which a European scholar, mistaking entirely its significance
because he read it in the dim and poor light of European religious experience,
has given the sounding misnomer, henotheism. Beyond, in the triple Infinite,
these godheads put on their highest nature and are names of the one
nameless Ineffable.
\par But the greatest power of the Vedic teaching, that which made it the
source of all later Indian philosophies, religions, systems of Yoga, lay in its
application to the inner life of man. Man lives in the physical cosmos subject
to death and the “much falsehood” of the mortal existence. To rise beyond
this death, to become one of the immortals, he has to turn from the falsehood
to the Truth; he has to turn to the Light and to battle with and to conquer the
powers of the Darkness. This he does by communion with the divine Powers
and their aid; the way to call down this aid was the secret of the Vedic
mystics. The symbols of the outer sacrifice are given for this purpose in the
manner of the Mysteries all over the world an inner meaning; they represent
a calling of the gods into the human being, a connecting sacrifice, an intimate
interchange, a mutual aid, a communion. There is a building of the powers of
the godheads within man and a formation in him of the universality of the
divine nature. For the gods are the guardians and increasers of the Truth, the
powers of the Immortal, the sons of the infinite Mother; the way to
immortality is the upward way of the gods, the way of the Truth, a journey,
an ascent by which there is a growth into the
Page 202

law of the Truth, \s{\,rtasya} \sforced{panth\=a\,h}. Man arrives at immortality
by breaking beyond the limitations not only of his physical self, but of his
mental and his ordinary psychic nature into the highest plane and supreme
ether of the Truth: for there is the foundation of immortality and the native
seat of the triple Infinite. On these ideas the Vedic sages built up a profound
psychological and psychic discipline which led beyond itself to a highest
spirituality and contained the nucleus of later Indian Yoga. Already we find in
their seed, though not in their full expansion, the most characteristic ideas of
Indian spirituality. There is the one Existence, \s{eka\.m sat}, supracosmic
beyond the individual and the universe. There is the one God who presents to
us the many forms, names, powers, personalities of his Godhead. There is the
distinction between the Knowledge and the Ignorance,
\note{\s{Cittim acitti\.m cinavad vi vidv\=an}. “Let the knower distinguish the
Knowledge and the Ignorance.”} the greater truth of an immortal life
opposed to the much falsehood or mixed truth and falsehood of mortal
existence. There is the discipline of an inward growth of man from the
physical through the psychic to the spiritual existence. There is the conquest
of death, the secret of immortality, the perception of a realisable divinity of
the human spirit. In an age to which in the insolence of our external
knowledge we are accustomed to look back as the childhood of humanity or
at best a period of vigorous barbarism, this was the inspired and intuitive
psychic and spiritual teaching by which the ancient human fathers, \s{p\=urve
pitara\,h manu\,sy\=a\,h}, founded a great and profound civilisation in India.
\par This high beginning was secured in its results by a larger sublime
efflorescence. The Upanishads have always been recognised in India as the
crown and end of Veda; that is indicated in their general name, Vedanta.
And they are in fact a large crowning outcome of the Vedic discipline and
experience. The time in which the Vedantic truth was wholly seen and the
Upanishads took shape, was, as we can discern from such records as the
Chhandogya and Brihadaranyaka, an epoch of immense and strenuous
seeking, an intense and ardent seed-time of the
Page 203

Spirit. In the stress of that seeking the truths held by the initiates but kept
back from ordinary men broke their barriers, swept through the higher mind
of the nation and fertilised the soil of Indian culture for a constant and ever
increasing growth of spiritual consciousness and spiritual experience. This
turn was not as yet universal; it was chiefly men of the higher classes,
Kshatriyas and Brahmins trained in the Vedic system of education, no longer
content with an external truth and the works of the outer sacrifice, who
began everywhere to seek for the highest word of revealing experience from
the sages who possessed the knowledge of the One. But we find too among
those who attained to the knowledge and became great teachers men of
inferior or doubtful birth like Janashruti, the wealthy Shudra, or Satyakama
Jabali, son of a servant-girl who knew not who was his father. The work that
was done in this period became the firm bedrock of Indian spirituality in later
ages and from it gush still the life-giving waters of a perennial and never
failing inspiration. This period, this activity, this grand achievement created
the whole difference between the evolution of Indian civilisation and the quite
different curve of other cultures.
\par For a time had come when the original Vedic symbols must lose their
significance and pass into an obscurity that became impenetrable, as did the
inner teaching of the Mysteries in other countries. The old poise of culture
between two extremes with a bridge of religious cult and symbolism to unite
them, the crude or half-trained naturalness of the outer physical man on one
side of the line, and on the other an inner and secret psychic and spiritual life
for the initiates could no longer suffice as the basis of our spiritual progress.
The human race in its cycle of civilisation needed a large-lined advance; it
called for a more and more generalised intellectual, ethical and aesthetic
evolution to help it to grow into the light. This turn had to come in India as in
other lands. But the danger was that the greater spiritual truth already gained
might be lost in the lesser confident half-light of the acute but unillumined
intellect or stifled within the narrow limits of the self-sufficient logical reason.
That was what actually happened in the West, Greece leading the way. The
old
Page 204

knowledge was prolonged in a less inspired, less dynamic and more
intellectual form by the Pythagoreans, by the Stoics, by Plato and the
Neo-Platonists; but still in spite of them and in spite of the only half-illumined
spiritual wave which swept over Europe from Asia in an ill-understood
Christianity, the whole real trend of Western civilisation has been intellectual,
rational, secular and even materialistic, and it keeps this character to the
present day. Its general aim has been a strong or a fine culture of the vital
and physical man by the power of an intellectualised ethics, aesthesis and
reason, not the leading up of our lower members into the supreme light and
power of the spirit. The ancient spiritual knowledge and the spiritual tendency
it had created were saved in India from this collapse by the immense effort
of the age of the Upanishads. The Vedantic seers renewed the Vedic truth
by extricating it from its cryptic symbols and casting it into a highest and most
direct and powerful language of intuition and inner experience. It was not the
language of the intellect, but still it wore a form which the intellect could take
hold of, translate into its own more abstract terms and convert into a
starting-point for an ever widening and deepening philosophic speculation and
the reason's long search after a Truth original, supreme and ultimate. There
was in India as in the West a great upbuilding of a high, wide and complex
intellectual, aesthetic, ethical and social culture. But left in Europe to its own
resources, combated rather than helped by obscure religious emotion and
dogma, here it was guided, uplifted and more and more penetrated and
suffused by a great saving power of spirituality and a vast stimulating and
tolerant light of wisdom from a highest ether of knowledge.
\par The second or post-Vedic age of Indian civilisation was distinguished by
the rise of the great philosophies, by a copious, vivid, many-thoughted,
many-sided epic literature, by the beginnings of art and science, by the
evolution of a vigorous and complex society, by the formation of large
kingdoms and empires, by manifold formative activities of all kinds and great
systems of living and thinking. Here as elsewhere, in Greece, Rome, Persia,
China, this was the age of a high outburst of the
Page 205

intelligence working upon life and the things of the mind to discover their
reason and their right way and bring out a broad and noble fullness of human
existence. But in India this effort never lost sight of the spiritual motive, never
missed the touch of the religious sense. It was a birth time and youth of the
seeking intellect and, as in Greece, philosophy was the main instrument by
which it laboured to solve the problems of life and the world. Science too
developed, but it came second only as an auxiliary power. It was through
profound and subtle philosophies that the intellect of India attempted to
analyse by the reason and logical faculty what had formerly been approached
with a much more living force through intuition and the soul's experience. But
the philosophic mind started from the data these mightier powers had
discovered and was faithful to its parent Light; it went back always in one
form or another to the profound truths of the Upanishads which kept their
place as the highest authority in these matters. There was a constant
admission that spiritual experience is a greater thing and its light a truer if
more incalculable guide than the clarities of the reasoning intelligence.
\par The same governing force kept its hold on all the other activities of the
Indian mind and Indian life. The epic literature is full almost to excess of a
strong and free intellectual and ethical thinking; there is an incessant criticism
of life by the intelligence and the ethical reason, an arresting curiosity and
desire to fix the norm of truth in all possible fields. But in the background and
coming constantly to the front there is too a constant religious sense and an
implicit or avowed assent to the spiritual truths which remained the
unshakable basis of the culture. These truths suffused with their higher light
secular thought and action or stood above to remind them that they were only
steps towards a goal. Art in India, contrary to a common idea, dwelt much
upon life; but still its highest achievement was always in the field of the
interpretation of the religio-philosophical mind and its whole tone was
coloured by a suggestion of the spiritual and the infinite. Indian society
developed with an unsurpassed organising ability, stable effectiveness,
practical insight its communal coordination of the mundane life of interest and
desire,
Page 206

\s{k\=ama}, \s{artha}; it governed always its action by a reference at every
point to the moral and religious law, the Dharma: but it never lost sight of
spiritual liberation as our highest point and the ultimate aim of the effort of
Life. In later times when there was a still stronger secular tendency of
intellectual culture, there came in an immense development of the mundane
intelligence, an opulent political and social evolution, an emphatic stressing of
aesthetic, sensuous and hedonistic experience. But this effort too always
strove to keep itself within the ancient frame and not to lose the special
stamp of the Indian cultural idea. The enlarged secular turn was
compensated by a deepening of the intensities of psycho-religious experience.
New religious or mystic forms and disciplines attempted to seize not only the
soul and the intellect, but the emotions, the senses, the vital and the aesthetic
nature of man and turn them into stuff of the spiritual life. And every excess
of emphasis on the splendour and richness and power and pleasures of life
had its recoil and was balanced by a corresponding potent stress on spiritual
asceticism as the higher way. The two trends, on one side an extreme of the
richness of life experience, on the other an extreme and pure rigorous
intensity of the spiritual life, accompanied each other; their interaction,
whatever loss there might be of the earlier deep harmony and large synthesis,
yet by their double pull preserved something still of the balance of Indian
culture.
\par Indian religion followed this line of evolution and kept its inner continuity
with its Vedic and Vedantic origins; but it changed entirely its mental
contents and colour and its outward basis. It did not effectuate this change
through any protestant revolt or revolution or with any idea of an iconoclastic
reformation. A continuous development of its organic life took place, a
natural transformation brought out latent motives or else gave to already
established motive-ideas a more predominant place or effective form. At one
time indeed it seemed as if a discontinuity and a sharp new beginning were
needed and would take place. Buddhism seemed to reject all spiritual
continuity with the Vedic religion. But this was after all less in reality than in
appearance. The Buddhist ideal of Nirvana was no more than a sharply
Page 207

\NH negative and exclusive statement of the highest Vedantic spiritual
experience. The ethical system of the eightfold path taken as the way to
release was an austere sublimation of the Vedic notion of the Right, Truth
and Law followed as the way to immortality, \s{\,rtasya} \sforced{panth\=a\,h}.
The strongest note of Mahayana Buddhism, its stress on universal
compassion and fellow-feeling, was an ethical application of the spiritual unity
which is the essential idea of Vedanta.
\note{Buddha himself does not seem to have preached his tenets as a novel
revolutionary creed, but as the old Aryan way, the true form of the eternal
religion.} The most characteristic tenets of the new discipline, Nirvana and
Karma, could have been supported from the utterances of the Brahmanas
and Upanishads. Buddhism could easily have claimed for itself a Vedic origin
and the claim would have been no less valid than the Vedic ascription of the
Sankhya philosophy and discipline with which it had some points of intimate
alliance. But what hurt Buddhism and determined in the end its rejection, was
not its denial of a Vedic origin or authority, but the exclusive trenchancy of its
intellectual, ethical and spiritual positions. A result of an intense stress of the
union of logical reason with the spiritualised mind—for it was by an intense
spiritual search supported on a clear and hard rational thinking that it was
born as a separate religion,—its trenchant affirmations and still more
exclusive negations could not be made sufficiently compatible with the native
flexibility, many-sided susceptibility and rich synthetic turn of the Indian
religious consciousness; it was a high creed but not plastic enough to hold the
heart of the people. Indian religion absorbed all that it could of Buddhism, but
rejected its exclusive positions and preserved the full line of its own
continuity, casting back to the ancient Vedanta.
\par This lasting line of change moved forward not by any destruction of
principle, but by a gradual fading out of the prominent Vedic forms and the
substitution of others. There was a transformation of symbol and ritual and
ceremony or a substitution of new kindred figures, an emergence of things
that are only hints in the original system, a development of novel idea-forms
Page 208

from the seed of the original thinking. And especially there was a farther
widening and fathoming of psychic and spiritual experience. The Vedic gods
rapidly lost their deep original significance. At first they kept their hold by
their outer cosmic sense but were overshadowed by the great Trinity,
Brahma-Vishnu-Shiva, and afterwards faded altogether. A new pantheon
appeared which in its outward symbolic aspects expressed a deeper truth and
larger range of religious experience, an intenser feeling, a vaster idea. The
Vedic sacrifice persisted only in broken and lessening fragments. The house
of Fire was replaced by the temple; the karmic ritual of sacrifice was
transformed into the devotional temple ritual; the vague and shifting mental
images of the Vedic gods figured in the mantras yielded to more precise
conceptual forms of the two great deities, Vishnu and Shiva, and of their
Shaktis and their offshoots. These new concepts stabilised in physical images
which were made the basis both for internal adoration and for the external
worship which replaced sacrifice. The psychic and spiritual mystic endeavour
which was the inner sense of the Vedic hymns, disappeared into the less
intensely luminous but more wide and rich and complex psycho-spiritual inner
life of Puranic and Tantric religion and Yoga.
\par The Purano-Tantric stage of the religion was once decried by European
critics and Indian reformers as a base and ignorant degradation of an earlier
and purer religion. It was rather an effort, successful in a great measure, to
open the general mind of the people to a higher and deeper range of inner
truth and experience and feeling. Much of the adverse criticism once heard
proceeded from a total ignorance of the sense and intention of this worship.
Much of this criticism has been uselessly concentrated on side-paths and
aberrations which could hardly be avoided in this immensely audacious
experimental widening of the basis of the culture. For there was a catholic
attempt to draw towards the spiritual truth minds of all qualities and people of
all classes. Much was lost of the profound psychic knowledge of the Vedic
seers, but much also of new knowledge was developed, untrodden ways
were opened and a hundred gates discovered into the Infinite. If we try to
see the essential sense and aim of this
Page 209

development and the intrinsic value of its forms and means and symbols, we
shall find that this evolution followed upon the early Vedic form very much
for the same reason as Catholic Christianity replaced the mysteries and
sacrifices of the early Pagan religions. For in both cases the outward basis of
the early religion spoke to the outward physical mind of the people and took
that as the starting-point of its appeal. But the new evolution tried to awaken
a more inner mind even in the common man, to lay hold on his inner vital and
emotional nature, to support all by an awakening of the soul and to lead him
through these things towards a highest spiritual truth. It attempted in fact to
bring the mass into the temple of the spirit rather than leave them in the outer
precincts. The outward physical sense was satisfied through its aesthetic turn
by a picturesque temple worship, by numerous ceremonies, by the use of
physical images; but these were given a psycho-emotional sense and
direction that was open to the heart and imagination of the ordinary man and
not reserved for the deeper sight of the elect or the strenuous tapasya of the
initiates. The secret initiation remained but was now a condition for the
passage from the surface psycho-emotional and religious to a profounder
psychic-spiritual truth and experience.
\par Nothing essential was touched in its core by this new orientation; but the
instruments, atmosphere, field of religious experience underwent a
considerable change. The Vedic godheads were to the mass of their
worshippers divine powers who presided over the workings of the outward
life of the physical cosmos; the Puranic Trinity had even for the multitude a
predominant psycho-religious and spiritual significance. Its more external
significances, for instance the functions of cosmic creation, preservation and
destruction, were only a dependent fringe of these profundities that alone
touched the heart of its mystery. The central spiritual truth remained in both
systems the same, the truth of the One in many aspects. The Trinity is a
triple form of the one supreme Godhead and Brahman; the Shaktis are
energies of the one Energy of the highest divine Being. But this greatest
religious truth was no longer reserved for the initiated few; it was now more
and more brought powerfully, widely and
Page 210

intensely home to the general mind and feeling of the people. Even the
so-called henotheism of the Vedic idea was prolonged and heightened in the
larger and simpler worship of Vishnu or Shiva as the one universal and
highest Godhead of whom all others are living forms and powers. The idea of
the Divinity in man was popularised to an extraordinary extent, not only the
occasional manifestation of the Divine in humanity which founded the
worship of the Avataras, but the Presence discoverable in the heart of every
creature. The systems of Yoga developed themselves on the same common
basis. All led or hoped to lead through many kinds of psycho-physical, inner
vital, inner mental and psycho-spiritual methods to the common aim of all
Indian spirituality, a greater consciousness and a more or less complete union
with the One and Divine or else an immergence of the individual soul in the
Absolute. The Purano-Tantric system was a wide, assured and many-sided
endeavour, unparalleled in its power, insight, amplitude, to provide the race
with a basis of generalised psycho-religious experience from which man
could rise through knowledge, works or love or through any other
fundamental power of his nature to some established supreme experience
and highest absolute status.
\par This great effort and achievement which covered all the time between
the Vedic age and the decline of Buddhism, was still not the last possibility of
religious evolution open to Indian culture. The Vedic training of the
physically-minded man made the development possible. But in its turn this
raising of the basis of religion to the inner mind and life and psychic nature,
this training and bringing out of the psychic man ought to make possible a still
larger development and support a greater spiritual movement as the leading
power of life. The first stage makes possible the preparation of the natural
external man for spirituality; the second takes up his outward life into a
deeper mental and psychical living and brings him more directly into contact
with the spirit and divinity within him; the third should render him capable of
taking up his whole mental, psychical, physical living into a first beginning at
least of a generalised spiritual life. This endeavour has manifested itself in the
evolution of Indian spirituality and
Page 211

is the significance of the latest philosophies, the great spiritual movements of
the saints and bhaktas and an increasing resort to the various paths of Yoga.
But unhappily it synchronised with a decline of Indian culture and an
increasing collapse of its general power and knowledge, and in these
surroundings it could not bear its natural fruit; but at the same time it has
done much to prepare such a possibility in the future. If Indian culture is to
survive and keep its spiritual basis and innate character, it is in this direction,
and not in a mere revival or prolongation of the Puranic system, that its
evolution must turn, rising so towards the fulfilment of that which the Vedic
seers saw as the aim of man and his life thousands of years ago and the
Vedantic sages cast into the clear and immortal forms of their luminous
revelation.
\par Even the psychic-emotional part of man's nature is not the inmost door to
religious feeling, nor is his inner mind the highest witness to spiritual
experience. There is behind the first the inmost soul of man, in that deepest
secret heart, \s{h\,rdaye guh\=ay\=am}, in which the ancient seers saw the very
tabernacle of the indwelling Godhead and there is above the second a
luminous highest mind directly open to a truth of the Spirit to which man's
normal nature has as yet only an occasional and momentary access.
Religious evolution, spiritual experience can find their true native road only
when they open to these hidden powers and make them their support for a
lasting change, a divinisation of human life and nature. An effort of this kind
was the very force behind the most luminous and vivid of the later
movements of India's vast religious cycle. It is the secret of the most
powerful forms of Vaishnavism and Tantra and Yoga. The labour of ascent
from our half-animal human nature into the fresh purity of the spiritual
consciousness needed to be followed and supplemented by a descent of the
light and force of the spirit into man's members and the attempt to transform
human into divine nature.
\par But it could not find its complete way or its fruit because it synchronised
with a decline of the life force in India and a lowering of power and
knowledge in her general civilisation and culture. Nevertheless here lies the
destined force of her survival
Page 212

and renewal, this is the dynamic meaning of her future. A widest and highest
spiritualising of life on earth is the last vision of all that vast and unexampled
seeking and experiment in a thousand ways of the soul's outermost and
innermost experience which is the unique character of her past; this in the
end is the mission for which she was born and the meaning of her existence.
Page 213

\par
\hn IX
\par
\ht Indian Spirituality and Life–3
\par\drop It is essential, if we are to get a right view of Indian civilisation or
of any civilisation, to keep to the central, living, governing things and not to be
led away by the confusion of accidents and details. This is a precaution
which the critics of our culture steadily refuse to take. A civilisation, a culture
must be looked at first in its initiating, supporting, durable central motives, in
its heart of abiding principle; otherwise we shall be likely to find ourselves,
like these critics, in a maze without a clue and we shall stumble about among
false and partial conclusions and miss entirely the true truth of the matter.
The importance of avoiding this error is evident when we are seeking for the
essential significance of Indian religious culture. But the same method must
be held to when we proceed to observe its dynamic formulation and the
effect of its spiritual ideal on life.
\par Indian culture recognises the spirit as the truth of our being and our life
as a growth and evolution of the spirit. It sees the Eternal, the Infinite, the
Supreme, the All; it sees this as the secret highest Self of all, this is what it
calls God, the Permanent, the Real, and it sees man as a soul and power of
this being of God in Nature. The progressive growth of the finite
consciousness of man towards this Self, towards God, towards the universal,
the eternal, the infinite, in a word his growth into spiritual consciousness, by
the development of his ordinary ignorant natural being into an illumined divine
nature, this is for Indian thinking the significance of life and the aim of human
existence. To this deeper and more spiritual idea of Nature and of existence
a great deal of what is strongest and most potential of fruitful consequences
in recent European thinking already turns with a growing impetus. This turn
may be a relapse to “barbarism” or it may be the high natural outcome of her
own increasing and ripened culture; that is a question for Europe to decide.
But
Page 214

\NH always to India this ideal inspiration or rather this spiritual vision of Self,
God, Spirit, this nearness to a cosmic consciousness, a cosmic sense and
feeling, a cosmic idea, will, love, delight into which we can release the limited,
ignorant, suffering ego, this drive towards the transcendental, eternal and
infinite, and the moulding of man into a conscious soul and power of that
greater Existence have been the engrossing motive of her philosophy, the
sustaining force of her religion, the fundamental idea of her civilisation and
culture.
\par I have suggested that the formal turn, the rhythmic lines of effort of this
culture must be regarded as having passed through two complete external
stages; while a third has taken its initial steps and is the destiny of her future.
The early Vedic was the first stage: then religion took its outward formal
stand on the natural approach of the physical mind of man to the Godhead in
the universe, but the initiates guarded the sacrificial fire of a greater spiritual
truth behind the form. The Purano-Tantric was the second stage: then
religion took its outward formal stand on the first deeper approaches of man's
inner mind and life to the Divine in the universe, but a greater initiation
opened the way to a far more intimate truth and pushed towards an inner
living of the spiritual life in all its profundity and in all the infinite possibilities
of an uttermost sublime experience. There has been long in preparation a
third stage which belongs to the future. Its inspiring idea has been often cast
out in limited or large, veiled and quiet or bold and striking spiritual
movements and potent new disciplines and religions, but it has not yet been
successful in finding its way or imposing new lines on human life. The
circumstances were adverse, the hour not yet come. This greatest movement
of the Indian spiritual mind has a double impulse. Its will is to call the
community of men and all men each according to his power to live in the
greatest light of all and found their whole life on some fully revealed power
and grand uplifting truth of the Spirit. But it has had too at times a highest
vision which sees the possibility not only of an ascent towards the Eternal but
of a descent of the Divine Consciousness and a change of human into divine
nature. A perception of the divinity hidden
Page 215

in man has been its crowning force. This is a turn that cannot be rightly
understood in the ideas or language of the European religious reformer or his
imitators. It is not what the purist of the reason or the purist of the spirit
imagines it to be and by that too hasty imagination falls short in his
endeavour. Its index vision is pointed to a truth that exceeds the human mind
and, if at all realised in his members, would turn human life into a divine
superlife. And not until this third largest sweep of the spiritual evolution has
come into its own, can Indian civilisation be said to have discharged its
mission, to have spoken its last word and be {\it functus officio}, crowned
and complete in its office of mediation between the life of man and the spirit.
\par The past dealings of Indian religion with life must be judged according to
the stages of its progress; each age of its movement must be considered on
its own basis. But throughout it consistently held to two perceptions that
showed great practical wisdom and a fine spiritual tact. First, it saw that the
approach to the spirit cannot be sudden, simple and immediate for all
individuals or for the community of men; it must come ordinarily or at least at
first through a gradual culture, training, progress. There must be an enlarging
of the natural life accompanied by an uplifting of all its motives; a growing
hold upon it of the higher rational, psychic and ethical powers must prepare
and lead it towards a higher spiritual law. But the Indian religious mind saw
too at the same time that if its greater aim was to be fruitful and the
character of its culture imperative, there must be throughout and at every
moment some kind of insistence on the spiritual motive. And for the mass of
men this means always some kind of religious influence. That pervasive
insistence was necessary in order that from the beginning some power of the
universal inner truth, some ray from the real reality of our existence might
cast its light or at least its sensible if subtle influence on the natural life of
man. Human life must be induced to flower, naturally in a way, but at the
same time with a wise nurturing and cultivation into its own profounder
spiritual significance. Indian culture has worked by two coordinated, mutually
stimulating and always interblended operations of which these perceptions
are the
Page 216

\NH principle. First, it has laboured to lead upward and enlarge the life of the
individual in the community through a natural series of life-stages till it was
ready for the spiritual levels. But also it has striven to keep that highest aim
before the mind at every stage and throw its influence on each circumstance
and action both of man's inner and his outer existence.
\par In the plan of its first aim it came nearer to the highest ancient culture of
mankind in other regions, but in a type and with a motive all its own. The
frame of its system was constituted by a triple quartette. Its first circle was
the synthesis and gradation of the fourfold object of life, vital desire and
hedonistic enjoyment, personal and communal interest, moral right and law,
and spiritual liberation. Its second circle was the fourfold order of society,
carefully graded and equipped with its fixed economic functions and its
deeper cultural, ethical and spiritual significances. Its third, the most original
and indeed unique of its englobing life-patterns, was the fourfold scale of the
successive stages of life, student, householder, forest recluse and free
supersocial man. This frame, these lines of a large and noble life-training
subsisted in their purity, their grand natural balance of austerity and
accommodation, their fine effectiveness during the later Vedic and heroic age
of the civilisation: afterwards they crumbled slowly or lost their completeness
and order. But the tradition, the idea with some large effect of its force and
some figure of its lines endured throughout the whole period of cultural
vigour. However deflected it might have been from its true form and spirit,
however mutilated and complicated for the worse, there was always left
some presence of its inspiration and power. Only in the decline do we get the
slow collapse, the degraded and confused mass of conventions which still
labours to represent the ancient and noble Aryan system, but in spite of relics
of glamour and beauty, in spite of survivals of spiritual suggestion and in spite
of a residue of the old high training, is little better than a detritus or a mass of
confused relics. Still even in this degradation enough of the original virtue has
remained to ensure a remarkable remnant of the ancient beauty,
attractiveness and power of survival.
Page 217

\par But the turn given to the other and more direct spiritual operation of this
culture is of a still greater importance. For it is that which, always surviving,
has coloured permanently the Indian mind and life. It has remained the same
behind every change of forms and throughout all the ages of the civilisation it
has renewed its effectiveness and held its field. This second side of the
cultural effort took the form of an endeavour to cast the whole of life into a
religious mould; it multiplied means and devices which by their insistent
suggestion and opportunity and their mass of effect would help to stamp a
Godward tendency on the entire existence. Indian culture was founded on a
religious conception of life and both the individual and the community drank in
at every moment its influence. It was stamped on them by the training and
turn of the education; the entire life atmosphere, all the social surroundings
were suffused with it; it breathed its power through the whole original form
and hieratic character of the culture. Always was felt the near idea of the
spiritual existence and its supremacy as the ideal, highest over all others;
everywhere there was the pervading pressure of the notion of the universe as
a manifestation of divine Powers and a movement full of the presence of the
Divine. Man himself was not a mere reasoning animal, but a soul in constant
relation with God and with the divine cosmic Powers. The soul's continued
existence was a cyclic or upward progress from birth to birth; human life was
the summit of an evolution which terminated in the conscious Spirit, every
stage of that life a step in a pilgrimage. Every single action of man had its
importance of fruit whether in future lives or in the worlds beyond the
material existence.
\par But Indian religion was not content with the general pressure of these
conceptions, the training, the atmosphere, the stamp on the culture. Its
persistent effort was to impress the mind at every moment and in each
particular with the religious influence. And to do this more effectively by a
living and practical adaptation, not asking from anyone what was too much
for him or too little, it took as a guiding idea its perception of the varying
natural capacity of man, \s{adhik\=ara}. It provided in its system means by
which each man high or low, wise or ignorant, exceptional or
Page 218

average might feel in the way suitable to his nature and evolutionary stage
the call, the pressure, the influence. Avoiding the error of the religions that
impose a single dogmatic and inflexible rule on every man regardless of the
possibilities of his nature, it tried rather to draw him gently upward and help
him to grow steadily in religious and spiritual experience. Every part of
human nature, every characteristic turn of its action was given a place in the
system; each was suitably surrounded with the spiritual idea and a religious
influence, each provided with steps by which it might rise towards its own
spiritual possibility and significance. The highest spiritual meaning of life was
set on the summits of each evolving power of the human nature. The
intelligence was called to a supreme knowledge, the dynamic active and
creative powers pointed to openness and unity with an infinite and universal
Will, the heart and sense put in contact with a divine love and joy and beauty.
But this highest meaning was also put everywhere indicatively or in symbols
behind the whole system of living, even in its details, so that its impression
might fall in whatever degree on the life, increase in pervasion and in the end
take up the entire control. This was the aim and, if we consider the
imperfections of our nature and the difficulty of the endeavour, we can say
that it achieved an unusual measure of success. It has been said with some
truth that for the Indian the whole of life is a religion. True of the ideal of
Indian life, it is true to a certain degree and in a certain sense in its fact and
practice. No step could be taken in the Indian's inner or outer life without his
being reminded of a spiritual existence. Everywhere he felt the closeness or
at least saw the sign of something beyond his natural life, beyond the moment
in time, beyond his individual ego, something other than the needs and
interests of his vital and physical nature. That insistence gave its tone and
turn to his thought and action and feeling; it produced that subtler
sensitiveness to the spiritual appeal, that greater readiness to turn to the
spiritual effort which are even now distinguishing marks of the Indian
temperament. It is that readiness, that sensitiveness which justifies us when
we speak of the characteristic spirituality of the Indian people.
Page 219

\par The ancient idea of the \s{adhik\=ara} has to be taken into careful account
if we would understand the peculiar character of Indian religion. In most
other religious systems we find a high-pitched spiritual call and a difficult and
rigid ethical standard far beyond the possibilities of man's half-evolved,
defective and imperfect nature. This standard, this call are announced as if
imperative on all; but it is evident that only a few can give an adequate
response. There is presented to our view for all our picture of life the sharp
division of two extremes; the saint and the worldling, the religious and the
irreligious, the good and the bad, the pious and the impious, souls accepted
and souls rejected, the sheep and the goats, the saved and the damned, the
believer and the infidel, are the two categories set constantly before us. All
between is a confusion, a tug of war, an uncertain balance. This crude and
summary classification is the foundation of the Christian system of an eternal
heaven and hell; at best, the Catholic religion humanely interposes a
precarious chance hung between that happy and this dread alternative, the
chance of a painful purgatory for more than nine tenths of the human race.
Indian religion set up on its summits a still more high-pitched spiritual call, a
standard of conduct still more perfect and absolute; but it did not go about its
work with this summary and unreflecting ignorance. All beings are to the
Indian mind portions of the Divine, evolving souls, and sure of an eventual
salvation and release into the spirit. All must feel, as the good in them grows
or, more truly, the godhead in them finds itself and becomes conscious, the
ultimate touch and call of their highest self and through that call the attraction
to the Eternal and Divine. But actually in life there are infinite differences
between man and man; some are more inwardly evolved, others are less
mature, many if not most are infant souls incapable of great steps and
difficult efforts. Each needs to be dealt with according to his nature and his
soul stature. But a general distinction can be drawn between three principal
types varying in their openness to the spiritual appeal or to the religious
influence or impulse. This distinction amounts to a gradation of three stages in
the growing human consciousness. One crude, ill-formed, still outward, still
Page 220

vitally and physically minded can be led only by devices suited to its
ignorance. Another, more developed and capable of a much stronger and
deeper psycho-spiritual experience, offers a riper make of manhood gifted
with a more conscious intelligence, a larger vital or aesthetic opening, a
stronger ethical power of the nature. A third, the ripest and most developed
of all, is ready for the spiritual heights, fit to receive or to climb towards the
loftiest ultimate truth of God and of its own being and to tread the summits of
divine experience.
\note{The Tantric distinction is between the animal man, the hero man and
the divine man, \s{pa\'su}, \s{v\=ira}, \s{deva}. Or we may grade the difference
according to the three gunas,—first, the tamasic or rajaso-tamasic man
ignorant, inert or moved only in a little light by small motive forces, the rajasic
or sattwo-rajasic man struggling with an awakened mind and will towards
self-development or self-affirmation, and the sattwic man open in mind and
heart and will to the Light, standing at the top of the scale and ready to
transcend it.}
\par It was to meet the need of the first type or level that Indian religion
created that mass of suggestive ceremony and effective ritual and strict
outward rule and injunction and all that pageant of attracting and compelling
symbol with which the cult is so richly equipped or profusely decorated.
These are for the most part forming and indicative things which work upon
the mind consciently and subconsciently and prepare it for an entry into the
significance of the greater permanent things that lie behind them. And for this
type too, for its vital mind and will, is intended all in the religion that calls on
man to turn to a divine Power or powers for the just satisfaction of his
desires and his interests, just because subject to the right and the law, the
Dharma. In the Vedic times the outward ritual sacrifice and at a later period
all the religious forms and notions that clustered visibly around the rites and
imagery of temple worship, constant festival and ceremony and daily act of
outward devotion were intended to serve this type or this soul-stage. Many of
these things may seem to the developed mind to belong to an ignorant or half
awakened religionism; but they have their concealed truth and their psychic
value and are indispensable in this stage for the development and difficult
awakening of the soul shrouded in the ignorance of material Nature.
Page 221

\par The middle stage, the second type starts from these things, but gets
behind them; it is capable of understanding more clearly and consciently the
psychic truths, the conceptions of the intelligence, the aesthetic indications,
the ethical values and all the other mediating directions which Indian religion
took care to place behind its symbols. These intermediate truths vivify the
outward forms of the system and those who can grasp them can go through
these mental indices towards things that are beyond the mind and approach
the profounder truths of the spirit. For at this stage there is already something
awake that can go inward to a more deeply psycho-religious experience.
Already the mind, heart and will have some strength to grapple with the
difficulties of the relations between the spirit and life, some urge to satisfy
more luminously or more inwardly the rational, aesthetic and ethical nature
and lead them upward towards their own highest heights; one can begin to
train mind and soul towards a spiritual consciousness and the opening of a
spiritual existence. This ascending type of humanity claims for its use all that
large and opulent middle region of philosophic, psycho-spiritual, ethical,
aesthetic and emotional religious seeking which is the larger and more
significant portion of the wealth of Indian culture. At this stage intervene the
philosophical systems, the subtle illumining debates and inquiries of the
thinkers; here are the nobler or more passionate reaches of devotion, here
are held up the higher, ampler or austerer ideals of the Dharma; here break in
the psychical suggestions and first definite urgings of the eternal and infinite
which draw men by their appeal and promise towards the practice of Yoga.
\par But these things, great as they were, were not final or supreme: they
were openings, steps of ascension towards the luminous grandeurs of spiritual
truth and its practice was kept ready and its means of attainment provided for
the third and greatest type of human being, the third loftiest stage of the
spiritual evolution. The complete light of spiritual knowledge when it emerges
from veil and compromise and goes beyond all symbols and middle
significances, the absolute and universal
Page 222

divine love, the beauty of the All-beautiful, the noblest dharma of unity with
all beings, universal compassion and benevolence calm and sweet in the
perfect purity of the spirit, the upsurge of the psychical being into the spiritual
unity or the spiritual ecstasy, these divinest things were the heritage of the
human being ready for divinity and their way and call were the supreme
significances of Indian religion and Yoga. He reached by them the fruits of
his perfect spiritual evolution, an identity with the Self and Spirit, a dwelling in
or with God, the divine law of his being, a spiritual universality, communion,
transcendence.
\par But distinctions are lines that can always be overpassed in the infinite
complexity of man's nature and there was no sharp and unbridgeable division,
only a gradation, since the actuality or potentiality of the three powers coexist
in all men. Both the middle and the highest significances were near and
present and pervaded the whole system, and the approaches to the highest
status were not absolutely denied to any man, in spite of certain prohibitions:
but these prohibitions broke down in practice or left a way of escape to the
man who felt the call; the call itself was a sign of election. He had only to
find the way and the guide. But even in the direct approach the principle of
\s{adhik\=ara}, differing capacity and varying nature, \s{svabh\=ava}, was
recognised in subtle ways, which it would be beyond my present purpose to
enumerate. One may note as an example the significant Indian idea of the
\s{i\,s\,ta-devat\=a}, the special name, form, idea of the Divinity which each man
may choose for worship and communion and follow after according to the
attraction in his nature and his capacity of spiritual intelligence. And each of
the forms has its outer initial associations and suggestions for the worshipper,
its appeal to the intelligence, psychical, aesthetic, emotional power in the
nature and its highest spiritual significance which leads through some one
truth of the Godhead into the essence of spirituality. One may note too that in
the practice of Yoga the disciple has to be led through his nature and
according to his capacity and the spiritual teacher and guide is expected to
perceive and take account of the necessary gradations and the individual
need and power in his giving of help and guidance.
Page 223

Many things may be objected to in the actual working of this large and
flexible system and I shall take some note of them when I have to deal with
the weak points or the pejorative side of the culture against which the hostile
critic directs with a misleading exaggeration his missiles. But the principle of
it and the main lines of the application embody a remarkable wisdom,
knowledge and careful observation of human nature and an assured insight
into the things of the spirit which none can question who has considered
deeply and flexibly these difficult matters or had any close experience of the
obstacles and potentialities of our nature in its approach to the concealed
spiritual reality.
\par This carefully graded and complex system of religious development and
spiritual evolution was linked on by a process of pervading intimate
connection to that general culture of the life of the human being and his
powers which must be the first care of every civilisation worth the name.
The most delicate and difficult part of this task of human development is
concerned with the thinking being of man, his mind of reason and knowledge.
No ancient culture of which we have knowledge, not even the Greek,
attached more importance to it or spent more effort on its cultivation. The
business of the ancient Rishi was not only to know God, but to know the
world and life and to reduce it by knowledge to a thing well understood and
mastered with which the reason and will of man could deal on assured lines
and on a safe basis of wise method and order. The ripe result of this effort
was the Shastra. When we speak of the Shastra nowadays, we mean too
often only the religio-social system of injunctions of the middle age made
sacrosanct by their mythical attribution to Manu, Parashara and other Vedic
sages. But in older India Shastra meant any systematised teaching and
science; each department of life, each line of activity, each subject of
knowledge had its science or Shastra. The attempt was to reduce each to a
theoretical and practical order founded on detailed observation, just
generalisation, full experience, intuitive, logical and experimental analysis and
synthesis, in order to enable man to know always with a just fruitfulness for
life and to act with the security of right knowledge. The smallest and the
greatest
Page 224

things were examined with equal care and attention and each provided with
its art and science. The name was given even to the highest spiritual
knowledge whenever it was stated not in a mass of intuitive experience and
revelatory knowledge as in the Upanishads, but for intellectual
comprehension in system and order,—and in that sense the Gita is able to call
its profound spiritual teaching the most secret science, \s{guhyatama\.m
\'s\=astram}. This high scientific and philosophical spirit was carried by the
ancient Indian culture into all its activities. No Indian religion is complete
without its outward form of preparatory practice, its supporting philosophy
and its Yoga or system of inward practice or art of spiritual living: most even
of what seems irrational in it to a first glance, has its philosophical turn and
significance. It is this complete understanding and philosophical character
which has given religion in India its durable security and immense vitality and
enabled it to resist the acid dissolvent power of modern sceptical inquiry;
whatever is ill-founded in experience and reason, that power can dissolve, but
not the heart and mind of these great teachings. But what we have more
especially to observe is that while Indian culture made a distinction between
the lower and the higher learning, the knowledge of things and the knowledge
of self, it did not put a gulf between them like some religions, but considered
the knowledge of the world and things as a preparatory and a leading up to
the knowledge of Self and God. All Shastra was put under the sanction of the
names of the Rishis, who were in the beginning the teachers not only of
spiritual truth and philosophy,—and we may note that all Indian philosophy,
even the logic of Nyaya and the atomic theory of the Vaisheshikas, has for
its highest crowning note and eventual object spiritual knowledge and
liberation,—but of the arts, the social, political and military, the physical and
psychic sciences, and every instructor was in his degree respected as a
\s{guru} or \s{\=ac\=arya}, a guide or preceptor of the human spirit. All
knowledge was woven into one and led up by degrees to the one highest
knowledge.
\par The whole right practice of life founded on this knowledge was in the
view of Indian culture a Dharma, a living according
Page 225

to a just understanding and right view of self-culture, of the knowledge of
things and life and of action in that knowledge. Thus each man and class and
kind and species and each activity of soul, mind, life, body has its dharma.
But the largest or at least most vitally important part of the Dharma was held
to be the culture and ordering of the ethical nature of man. The ethical aspect
of life, contrary to the amazingly ignorant observation of a certain type of
critics, attracted a quite enormous amount of attention, occupied the greater
part of Indian thought and writing not devoted to the things of pure
knowledge and of the spirit and was so far pushed that there is no ethical
formation or ideal which does not reach in it its highest conception and a
certain divine absolutism of ideal practice. Indian thought took for
granted,—though there are some remarkable speculations to the
contrary,—the ethical nature of man and the ethical law of the world. It
considered that man was justified in satisfying his desires, since that is
necessary for the satisfaction and expansion of life, but not in obeying the
dictates of desire as the law of his being; for in all things there is a greater
law, each has not only its side of interest and desire, but its dharma or rule of
right practice, satisfaction, expansion, regulation. The Dharma, then, fixed by
the wise in the Shastra is the right thing to observe, the true rule of action.
First in the web of Dharma comes the social law; for man's life is only
initially for his vital, personal, individual self, but much more imperatively for
the community, though most imperatively of all for the greatest Self one in
himself and in all beings, for God, for the Spirit. Therefore first the individual
must subordinate himself to the communal self, though by no means bound
altogether to efface himself in it as the extremists of the communal idea
imagine. He must live according to the law of his nature harmonised with the
law of his social type and class, for the nation and in a higher reach of his
being—this was greatly stressed by the Buddhists—for humanity. Thus living
and acting he could learn to transcend the social scale of the Dharma,
practise without injuring the basis of life the ideal scale and finally grow into
the liberty of the spirit, when rule and duty were not binding because he
would then move and
Page 226

act in a highest free and immortal dharma of the divine nature. All these
aspects of the Dharma were closely linked up together in a progressive unity.
Thus, for an example, each of the four orders had its own social function and
ethics, but also an ideal rule for the growth of the pure ethical being, and
every man by observing his dharma and turning his action Godwards could
grow out of it into the spiritual freedom. But behind all dharma and ethics
was put, not only as a safeguard but as a light, a religious sanction, a
reminder of the continuity of life and of man's long pilgrimage through many
births, a reminder of the Gods and planes beyond and of the Divine, and
above it all the vision of a last stage of perfect comprehension and unity and
of divine transcendence.
\par The system of Indian ethics liberalised by the catholicity of the ancient
mind did not ban or violently discourage the aesthetic or even the hedonistic
being of man in spite of a growing ascetic tendency and a certain high
austerity of the summits. The aesthetic satisfactions of all kinds and all
grades were an important part of the culture. Poetry, the drama, song, dance,
music, the greater and lesser arts were placed under the sanction of the
Rishis and were made instruments of the spirit's culture. A just theory held
them to be initially the means of a pure aesthetic satisfaction and each was
founded on its own basic rule and law, but on that basis and with a perfect
fidelity to it still raised up to minister to the intellectual, ethical and religious
development of the being. It is notable that the two vast Indian epics have
been considered as much as Dharma-shastras as great historico-mythic epic
narratives, \s{itih\=asas}. They are, that is to say, noble, vivid and puissant
pictures of life, but they utter and breathe throughout their course the law and
ideal of a great and high ethical and religious spirit in life and aim in their
highest intention at the idea of the Divine and the way of the mounting soul in
the action of the world. Indian painting, sculpture and architecture did not
refuse service to the aesthetic satisfaction and interpretation of the social,
civic and individual life of the human being; these things, as all evidences
show, played a great part in their motives of creation, but still
Page 227

their highest work was reserved for the greatest spiritual side of the culture,
and throughout we see them seized and suffused with the brooding stress of
the Indian mind on the soul, the Godhead, the spiritual, the Infinite. And we
have to note too that the aesthetic and hedonistic being was made not only an
aid to religion and spirituality and liberally used for that purpose, but even one
of the main gates of man's approach to the Spirit. The Vaishnava religion
especially is a religion of love and beauty and of the satisfaction of the whole
delight-soul of man in God and even the desires and images of the sensuous
life were turned by its vision into figures of a divine soul-experience. Few
religions have gone so far as this immense catholicity or carried the whole
nature so high in its large, puissant and many-sided approach to the spiritual
and the infinite.
\par Finally, there is the most outwardly vital life of man, his ordinary
dynamic, political, economical and social being. This too Indian culture took
strenuously in hand and subjected its whole body to the pressure of its own
ideals and conceptions. Its method was to build up great shastras of social
living, duty and enjoyment, military and political rule and conduct and
economical well-being. These were directed on one side to success,
expansion, opulence and the right art and relation of these activities, but on
those motives, demanded by the very nature of the vital man and his action,
was imposed the law of the Dharma, a stringent social and ethical ideal and
rule—thus the whole life of the king as the head of power and responsibility
was regulated by it in its every hour and function,—and the constant
reminder of religious duty. In latter times a Machiavellian principle of
statecraft, that which has been always and is still pursued by governments
and diplomats, encroached on this nobler system, but in the best age of Indian
thought this depravation was condemned as a temporarily effective, but
lesser, ignoble and inferior way of policy. The great rule of the culture was
that the higher a man's position and power, the larger the scope of his
function and influence of his acts and example, the greater should be the call
on him of the Dharma. The whole law and custom of society was placed
under the sanction of the Rishis and the gods,
Page 228

protected from the violence of the great and powerful, given a socio-religious
character and the king himself charged to live and rule as the guardian and
servant of the Dharma with only an executive power over the community
which was valid so long as he observed with fidelity the Law. And as this
vital aspect of life is the one which most easily draws us outward and away
from the inner self and the diviner aim of living, it was the most strenuously
linked up at every point with the religious idea in the way the vital man can
best understand, in the Vedic times by the constant reminder of the sacrifice
behind every social and civic act, at a later period by religious rites,
ceremonies, worship, the calling in of the gods, the insistence on the
subsequent results or a supraterrestrial aim of works. So great was this
preoccupation, that while in the spiritual and intellectual and other spheres a
considerable or a complete liberty was allowed to speculation, action,
creation, here the tendency was to impose a rigorous law and authority, a
tendency which in the end became greatly exaggerated and prevented the
expansion of the society into new forms more suitable for the need of the
spirit of the age, the Yugadharma. A door of liberty was opened to the
community by the provision of an automatic permission to change custom and
to the individual in the adoption of the religious life with its own higher
discipline or freedom outside the ordinary social weft of binding rule and
injunction. A rigid observation and discipline of the social law, a larger nobler
discipline and freer self-culture of the ideal side of the Dharma, a wide
freedom of the religious and spiritual life became the three powers of the
system. The steps of the expanding human spirit mounted through these
powers to its perfection.
\par Thus the whole general character of the application of Indian ideals to
life became throughout of this one texture, the constant, subtly graded, subtly
harmonised preparation of the soul of man for its spiritual being. First, the
regulated satisfaction of the primary natural being of man subjected to the
law of the Dharma and the ethical idea and besieged at every moment by the
suggestions of religion, a religion at first appealing to his more outward
undeveloped mind, but in each of
Page 229

its outward symbols and circumstances opening to a profounder significance,
armed with the indication of a profoundest spiritual and ideal meaning as its
justification. Then, the higher steps of the developed reason and psychical,
ethical and aesthetic powers closely interwoven and raised by a similar
opening beyond themselves to their own heights of spiritual direction and
potentiality. Finally, each of these growing powers in man was made on its
own line of approach a gateway into his divine and spiritual being. Thus we
may observe that there was created a Yoga of knowledge for the
self-exceeding of the thinking intellectual man, a Yoga of works for the
self-exceeding of the active, dynamic and ethical man, a Yoga of love and
bhakti for the self-exceeding of the emotional, aesthetic, hedonistic man, by
which each arrived to perfection through a self-ward, spiritual, God-ward
direction of his own special power, as too a Yoga of self-exceeding through
the power of the psychical being and even through the power of the life in the
body,—Yogas which could be practised in separation or with some kind of
synthesis. But all these ways of self-exceeding led to a highest
self-becoming. To become one with universal being and all existences, one
with the self and spirit, united with God completed the human evolution, built
the final step of man's self-culture.
Page 230

\par
\hn X
\par
\ht Indian Spirituality and Life–4
\par\drop I have dwelt at some length, though still very inadequately, on the
principles of Indian religion, the sense of its evolution and the intention of its
system, because these things are being constantly ignored and battle
delivered by its defenders and assailants on details, particular consequences
and side issues. Those too have their importance because they are part of the
practical execution, the working out of the culture in life; but they cannot be
rightly valued unless we seize hold of the intention which was behind the
execution. And the first thing we see is that the principle, the essential
intention of Indian culture was extraordinarily high, ambitious and noble, the
highest indeed that the human spirit can conceive. For what can be a greater
idea of life than that which makes it a development of the spirit in man to its
most vast, secret and high possibilities,—a culture that conceives of life as a
movement of the Eternal in time, of the universal in the individual, of the
infinite in the finite, of the Divine in man, or holds that man can become not
only conscious of the eternal and the infinite, but live in its power and
universalise, spiritualise and divinise himself by self-knowledge? What greater
aim can be for the life of man than to grow by an inner and outer experience
till he can live in God, realise his spirit, become divine in knowledge, in will
and in the joy of his highest existence? And that is the whole sense of the
striving of Indian culture.
\par It is easy to say that these ideas are fantastic, chimerical and
impracticable, that there is no spirit and no eternal and nothing divine, and
man would do much better not to dabble in religion and philosophy, but rather
make the best he can of the ephemeral littleness of his life and body. That is
a negation natural enough to the vital and physical mind, but it rests on the
assumption that man can only be what he is at the moment, and
Page 231

there is nothing greater in him which it is his business to evolve; such a
negation has no enduring value. The whole aim of a great culture is to lift
man up to something which at first he is not, to lead him to knowledge though
he starts from an unfathomable ignorance, to teach him to live by his reason,
though actually he lives much more by his unreason, by the law of good and
unity, though he is now full of evil and discord, by a law of beauty and
harmony though his actual life is a repulsive muddle of ugliness and jarring
barbarisms, by some high law of his spirit, though at present he is egoistic,
material, unspiritual, engrossed by the needs and desires of his physical being.
If a civilisation has not any of these aims, it can hardly at all be said to have a
culture and certainly in no sense a great and noble culture. But the last of
these aims, as conceived by ancient India, is the highest of all because it
includes and surpasses all the others. To have made this attempt is to have
ennobled the life of the race; to have failed in it is better than if it had never
at all been attempted; to have achieved even a partial success is a great
contribution to the future possibilities of the human being.
\par The system of Indian culture is another thing. A system is in its very
nature at once an effectuation and a limitation of the spirit; and yet we must
have a science and art of life, a system of living. All that is needed is that the
lines laid down should be large and noble, capable of evolution so that the
spirit may more and more express itself in life, flexible even in its firmness so
that it may absorb and harmonise new material and enlarge its variety and
richness without losing its unity. The system of Indian culture was all these
things in its principle and up to a certain point and a certain period in its
practice. That a decline came upon it in the end and a kind of arrest of
growth, not absolute, but still very serious and dangerous to its life and future,
is perfectly true, and we shall have to ask whether that was due to the
inherent character of the culture, to a deformation or to a temporary
exhaustion of the force of living, and, if the last, how that exhaustion came.
At present, I will only note in passing one point which has its importance. Our
critic is never tired of harping on India's misfortunes and he attributes them
Page 232

all to the incurable badness of our civilisation, the total absence of a true and
sound culture. Now misfortune is not a proof of absence of culture, nor good
fortune the sign of salvation. Greece was unfortunate; she was as much torn
by internal dissensions and civil wars as India, she was finally unable to arrive
at unity or preserve independence; yet Europe owes half its civilisation to
those squabbling inconsequent petty peoples of Greece. Italy was unfortunate
enough in all conscience, yet few nations have contributed more to European
culture than incompetent and unfortunate Italy. The misfortunes of India have
been considerably exaggerated, at least in their incidence, but take them at
their worst, admit that no nation has suffered more. If all that is due to the
badness of our civilisation, to what is due then the remarkable fact of the
obstinate survival of India, her culture and her civilisation under this load of
misfortunes, or the power which enables her still to assert herself and her
spirit at this moment, to the great wrath of her critics, against the tremendous
shock of the flood from Europe which has almost submerged other peoples?
If her misfortunes are due to her cultural deficiencies, must not by a parity of
reasoning this extraordinary vitality be due to some great force in her, some
enduring virtue of truth in her spirit? A mere lie and insanity cannot live; its
persistence is a disease which must before long lead to death; it cannot be
the source of an unslayable life. There must be some heart of soundness,
some saving truth which has kept this people alive and still enables it to raise
its head and affirm its will to be and its faith in its mission.
\par But, finally, we have to see not only the spirit and principle of the culture,
not only the ideal idea and scope of intention in its system, but its actual
working and effect in the values of life. Here we must admit great limitations,
great imperfections. There is no culture, no civilisation ancient or modern
which in its system has been entirely satisfactory to the need of perfection in
man; there is none in which the working has not been marred by considerable
limitations and imperfections. And the greater the aim of the culture, the
larger the body of the civilisation, the more are these flaws likely to overbear
the eye. In the first place
Page 233

every culture suffers by the limitations or defects of its qualities and, an
almost infallible consequence, by the exaggerations too of its qualities. It
tends to concentrate on certain leading ideas and to lose sight of others or
unduly depress them; this want of balance gives rise to one-sided tendencies
which are not properly checked, not kept in their due place, and bring about
unhealthy exaggerations. But so long as the vigour of the civilisation lasts, life
accommodates itself, makes the most of compensating forces and in spite of
all stumblings, evils, disasters some great thing is done; but in a time of
decline the defect or the excess of a particular quality gets the upper hand,
becomes a disease, makes a general ravage and, if not arrested, may lead to
decay and death. Again, the ideal may be great, may have even, as Indian
culture had in its best times, a certain kind of provisional completeness, a first
attempt at comprehensive harmony, but there is always a great gulf between
the ideal and the actual practice of life. To bridge that gulf or at least to make
it as narrow as possible is the most difficult part of human endeavour. Finally,
the evolution of our race, surprising enough if we look across the ages, is still,
when all is said, a slow and embarrassed progress. Each age, each civilisation
carries the heavy burden of our deficiencies, each succeeding age throws off
something of the load, but loses some virtue of the past, creates other gaps
and embarrasses itself with new aberrations. We have to strike a balance, to
see things in the whole, to observe whither we are tending and use a large
secular vision; otherwise it would be difficult to keep an unfailing faith in the
destinies of the race. For, after all, what we have accomplished so far in the
main at the best of times is to bring in a modicum of reason and culture and
spirituality to leaven a great mass of barbarism. Mankind is still no more than
semi-civilised and it was never anything else in the recorded history of its
present cycle.
\par And therefore every civilisation presents a mixed and anomalous
appearance and can be turned by a hostile or unsympathetic observation
which notes and exaggerates its defects, ignores its true spirit and its
qualities, masses the shades, leaves out the lights, into a mass of barbarism, a
picture of almost
Page 234

unrelieved gloom and failure, to the legitimate surprise and indignation of
those to whom its motives appear to have a great and just value. For each
has achieved something of special value for humanity in the midst of its
general work of culture, brought out in a high degree some potentiality of our
nature and given a first large standing-ground for its future perfection.
Greece developed to a high degree the intellectual reason and the sense of
form and harmonious beauty, Rome founded firmly strength and power and
patriotism and law and order, modern Europe has raised to enormous
proportions practical reason, science and efficiency and economic capacity,
India developed the spiritual mind working on the other powers of man and
exceeding them, the intuitive reason, the philosophical harmony of the
Dharma informed by the religious spirit, the sense of the eternal and the
infinite. The future has to go on to a greater and more perfect comprehensive
development of these things and to evolve fresh powers, but we shall not do
this rightly by damning the past or damning other cultures than our own in a
spirit of arrogant intolerance. We need not only a spirit of calm criticism, but
an eye of sympathetic intuition to extract the good from the past and present
effort of humanity and make the most of it for our future progress.
\par This being so, if our critic insists that the past culture of India was of the
nature of a semi-barbarism, I shall not object, so long as I have the liberty of
passing the same criticism, equally valid or invalid, on the type of European
culture which he wishes to foist on us in its place. Mr. Archer feels the
openings which European civilisation gives to this kind of retort and he pleads
plaintively that it ought not to be made; he takes refuge in the old tag that a
{\it tu quoque} is no argument. Certainly the retort would be irrelevant if this
were only a question of the dispassionate criticism of Indian culture without
arrogant comparisons and offensive pretensions. But it becomes a perfectly
valid and effective argument when the critic turns into a partisan and tries to
trample underfoot all the claims of the Indian spirit and its civilisation in the
name of the superiority of Europe. When he insists on our renouncing our
own natural being and culture
Page 235

in order to follow and imitate the West as docile pupils on the ground of
India's failure to achieve cultural perfection or the ideal of a sound civilisation,
we have a right to point out that Europe has to its credit at least as ugly a
failure, and for the same fundamental reasons. We have a right to ask
whether science, practical reason and efficiency and an unbridled economic
production which makes man a slave of his life and body, a wheel, spring or
cog in a huge mechanism or a cell of an economic organism and translates
into human terms the ideal of the ant-hill and the bee-hive, is really the whole
truth of our being and a sound or complete ideal of civilisation. The ideal of
this culture, though it has its obstacles and difficulties, is at any rate not an
unduly exalted aim and ought to be more easy of accomplishment than the
arduous spiritual ideal of ancient India. But how much of the European mind
and life is really governed by reason and what does this practical reason and
efficiency come to in the end? To what perfection has it brought the human
mind and soul and life? The aggressive ugliness of modern European life, its
paucity of philosophic reason and aesthetic beauty and religious aspiration, its
constant unrest, its harsh and oppressive mechanical burden, its lack of inner
freedom, its recent huge catastrophe, the fierce struggle of classes are things
of which we have a right to take note. To harp in the style of the Archerian
lyre on these aspects alone and to ignore the brighter side of modern ideals
would certainly be an injustice. There was a time indeed many years ago,
when, while admiring the past cultural achievement of Europe, the present
industrial form of it seemed to me an intellectualised Titanic barbarism with
Germany as its too admired type and successful protagonist. A wider view of
the ways of the Spirit in the world corrects the one-sidedness of this notion,
but still it contains a truth which Europe recognised in the hour of her agony,
though now she seems to be forgetting too easily her momentary illumination.
Mr. Archer argues that at least the West is trying to struggle out of its
barbarism while India has been content to stagnate in her deficiencies. That
may be a truth of the immediate past; but what then? The question still
remains whether Europe is taking the only, the complete or
Page 236

the best way open to human endeavour and whether it is not the right thing
for India, not to imitate Europe, though she well may learn from Western
experience, but to get out of her stagnation by developing what is best and
most essential in her own spirit and culture.
\par The right, the natural path for India lies so obviously in this direction that
in order to destroy it Mr. Archer in his chosen role as devil's advocate has to
juggle with the truth at every step and labour hard and vainly to reestablish
the spell of hypnotic suggestion, now broken for good, which led most of us
for a long space to condemn wholesale ourselves and our past and imagine
that the Indian's whole duty in life was to turn an imitative ape in
leading-strings and dance to the mechanic barrel-organ tunes of the British
civiliser. The claim of Indian culture to survival can be met first and most
radically by challenging the value of its fundamental ideas and the high things
which are most native to its ideal, its temperament, its way of looking at the
world. To deny the truth or the value of spirituality, of the sense of the eternal
and infinite, the inner spiritual experience, the philosophic mind and spirit, the
religious aim and feeling, the intuitive reason, the idea of universality and
spiritual unity is one resource, and this is the real attitude of our critic which
emerges constantly in his vehement philippic. But he cannot carry it through
consistently, because it brings him into conflict with ideas and perceptions
which are ineradicable in the human mind and which even in Europe are now
after a temporary obscuration beginning to come back into favour. Therefore
he hedges and tries rather to prove that we find in India, even in her
magnificent past, even at her best, no spirituality, no real philosophy, no true
or high religious feeling, no light of intuitive reason, nothing at all of the great
things to which she has directed her most strenuous aspiration. This assertion
is sufficiently absurd, self-contradictory and opposed to the express testimony
of those who are eminently fitted and entitled to express an authoritative
opinion on these matters. He therefore establishes a third line of attack
combined of two inconsistent and opposite assertions, first, that the higher
Hinduism which is made up of
Page 237

these greater things has had no effect on India and, secondly, that it has had
on the contrary a most all-pervading, a most disastrous and paralysing, a
soul-killing, life-killing effect. He attempts to make his indictment effective by
massing together all these inconsistent lines of attack and leading them all to
the one conclusion, that the culture of India is both in theory and practice
wrong, worthless, deleterious to the true aim of human living.
\par The last position taken is the only one which we need now consider,
since the value of the essential ideas of Indian culture cannot be destroyed
and to deny them is futile. The things they stand for are there, in whatever
form, vaguely or distinctly seeking for themselves in the highest and deepest
movements of human being and its nature. The peculiarity of Indian culture
lies only in this distinction that what is vague or confused or imperfectly
brought out in most other cultures, it has laboured rather to make distinct, to
sound all its possibilities, to fix its aspects and lines and hold it up as a true,
precise, large and practicable ideal for the race. The formulation may not be
entirely complete; it may have to be still more enlarged, bettered, put
otherwise, things missed brought out, the lines and forms modified, errors of
stress and direction corrected; but a firm, a large foundation has been laid
down not only in theory, but in solid practice. If there has been an actual
complete failure in life,—and that is the one point left,—it must be due to one
of two causes; either there has been some essential bungling in the
application of the ideal to the facts of life as it is, or else there has been a
refusal to recognise the facts of life at all. Perhaps, then, there has been, to
put it otherwise, an insistence on what we may be at some hardly attainable
height of our being without having first made the most of what we are. The
infinite can only be reached after we have grown in the finite, the eternal
grasped only by man growing in time, the spiritual perfected only by man
accomplished first in body, life and mind. If that necessity has been ignored,
then one may fairly contend that there has been a gross, impracticable and
inexcusable error in the governing idea of Indian culture. But as a matter of
fact there has been no such
Page 238

error. We have seen what were the aim and idea and method of Indian
culture and it will be perfectly clear that the value of life and its training were
amply recognised in its system and given their proper place. Even the most
extreme philosophies and religions, Buddhism and Illusionism, which held life
to be an impermanence or ignorance that must be transcended and cast
away, yet did not lose sight of the truth that man must develop himself under
the conditions of this present ignorance or impermanence before he can
attain to knowledge and to that Permanent which is the denial of temporal
being. Buddhism was not solely a cloudy sublimation of Nirvana, nothingness,
extinction and the tyrannous futility of Karma; it gave us a great and
powerful discipline for the life of man on earth. The enormous positive
effects it had on society and ethics and the creative impulse it imparted to art
and thought and in a less degree to literature, are a sufficient proof of the
strong vitality of its method. If this positive turn was present in the most
extreme philosophy of denial, it was still more largely present in the totality of
Indian culture.
\par There has been indeed from early times in the Indian mind a certain
strain, a tendency towards a lofty and austere exaggeration in the direction
taken by Buddhism and Mayavada. This excess was inevitable, the human
mind being what it is; it had even its necessity and value. Our mind does not
arrive at the totality of truth easily and by one embracing effort; an arduous
search is the condition of its finding. The mind opposes different sides of the
truth to each other, follows each to its extreme possibility, treats it even for a
time as the sole truth, makes imperfect compromises, arrives by various
adjustments and gropings nearer to the true relations. The Indian mind
followed this method; it covered, as far as it could, the whole field, tried every
position, looked at the truth from every angle, attempted many extremes and
many syntheses. But the European critic very ordinarily labours under the
idea that this exaggeration in the direction of negating life was actually the
whole of Indian thought and sentiment or the one undisputed governing idea
of the culture. Nothing could be more false and
Page 239

inaccurate. The early Vedic religion did not deny, but laid a full emphasis on
life. The Upanishads did not deny life, but held that the world is a
manifestation of the Eternal, of Brahman, all here is Brahman, all is in the
Spirit and the Spirit is in all, the self-existent Spirit has become all these things
and creatures; life too is Brahman, the life-force is the very basis of our
existence, the life-spirit Vayu is the manifest and evident Eternal,
\s{pratyak\,sa\.m brahma}. But it affirmed that the present way of existence of
man is not the highest or the whole; his outward mind and life are not all his
being; to be fulfilled and perfect he has to grow out of his physical and mental
ignorance into spiritual self-knowledge.
\par Buddhism arrived at a later stage and seized on one side of these ancient
teachings to make a sharp spiritual and intellectual opposition between the
impermanence of life and the permanence of the Eternal which brought to a
head and made a gospel of the ascetic exaggeration. But the synthetic Hindu
mind struggled against this negation and finally threw out Buddhism, though
not without contracting an increased bias in this direction. That bias came to
its height in the philosophy of Shankara, his theory of Maya, which put its
powerful imprint on the Indian mind and, coinciding with a progressive decline
in the full vitality of the race, did tend for a time to fix a pessimistic and
negative view of terrestrial life and distort the larger Indian ideal. But his
theory is not at all a necessary deduction from the great Vedantic authorities,
the Upanishads, Brahmasutras and Gita, and was always combated by other
Vedantic philosophies and religions which drew from them and from spiritual
experience very different conclusions. At the present time, in spite of a
temporary exaltation of Shankara's philosophy, the most vital movements of
Indian thought and religion are moving again towards the synthesis of
spirituality and life which was an essential part of the ancient Indian ideal.
Therefore Mr. Archer's contention that whatever India has achieved in life
and creation and action has been done in spite of the governing ideas of her
culture, since logically she ought to have abandoned life and creation and
action, is as unsound as it is unnatural and grotesque. To develop to the full
the intellectual, the dynamic
Page 240

and volitional, the ethical, the aesthetic, the social and economic being of man
was an important element of Indian civilisation,—if for nothing else, at least
as an indispensable preliminary to spiritual perfection and freedom. India's
best achievements in thought, art, literature, society were the logical outcome
of her religio-philosophical culture.
\par But still it may be argued that whatever may have been the theory, the
exaggeration was there and in practice it discouraged life and action. That,
when its other falsities have been eliminated, is what Mr. Archer's criticism
comes to in the end; the emphasis on the Self, the eternal, the universal, the
impersonal, the infinite discouraged, he thinks, life, will, personality, human
action and led to a false and life-killing asceticism. India achieved nothing of
importance, produced no great personalities, was impotent in will and
endeavour, her literature and art are a barbaric and monstrous nullity not
equal even to the third-rate work of Europe, her life story a long and dismal
record of incompetence and failure. An inconsistency more or less is nothing
to this critic and in the same breath he affirms that this very India, described
by him elsewhere as always effete, sterile or a mother of monstrous
abortions, is one of the most interesting countries in the world, that her art
casts a potent and attractive spell and has numberless beauties, that her very
barbarisms are magnificent and that, most wonderful of all, in presence of
some of her personalities in the abodes of her ancient fine-spun aristocratic
culture a European is apt to feel like a semi-barbarian intruder! But let us
leave aside these signs of grace which are only an occasional glimmering of
light across the darkness and gloom of Mr. Archer's mood. We must see
how far there is any foundation for the substance of this criticism. What was
the real value of Indian life, will, personality, achievement, creation, those
things that she regards as her glories, but her critic tells her she should
shudder at as her disgrace? That is the one remaining vital question.
Page 241

\par
\hn XI
\par
\ht Indian Spirituality and Life–5
\par\drop The most general charge against Indian culture in its practical
effects can be dismissed without any serious difficulty. The critic with whom
I have to deal has, in fact, spoiled his case by the spirit of frantic
exaggeration in which he writes. To say that there has been no great or vivid
activity of life in India, that she has had no great personalities with the
mythical exception of Buddha and the other pale exception of Asoka, that she
has never shown any will-power and never done any great thing, is so
contrary to all the facts of history that only a devil's advocate in search of a
case could advance it at all or put it with that crude vehemence. India has
lived and lived greatly, whatever judgment one may pass on her ideas and
institutions. What is meant after all by life and when is it that we most fully
and greatly live? Life is surely nothing but the creation and active
self-expression of man's spirit, powers, capacities, his will to be and think and
create and love and do and achieve. When that is wanting or, since it cannot
be absolutely wanting, depressed, held under, discouraged or inert, whether
by internal or external causes, then we may say that there is a lack of life.
Life in its largest sense is the great web of our internal and external action,
the play of Shakti, the play of Karma; it is religion and philosophy and thought
and science and poetry and art, drama and song and dance and play, politics
and society, industry, commerce and trade, adventure and travel, war and
peace, conflict and unity, victory and defeat and aspirations and vicissitudes,
the thoughts, emotions, words, deeds, joys and sorrows which make up the
existence of man. In a narrower sense life is sometimes spoken of as the
more obvious and external vital action, a thing which can be depressed by a
top-heavy intellectuality or ascetic spirituality, sicklied over with the pale cast
of thought or the paler cast of world-weariness or made
Page 242

flat, stale and uninteresting by a formalised, conventional or too strait-laced
system of society. Again, life may be very active and full of colour for a
small and privileged part of the community, but the life of the mass dull, void
and miserable. Or, finally, there may be all the ordinary materials and
circumstances of mere living, but if life is not uplifted by great hopes,
aspirations and ideals, then we may well say that the community does not
really live; it is defective in the characteristic greatness of the human spirit.
\par The ancient and mediaeval life of India was not wanting in any of the
things that make up the vivid interesting activity of human existence. On the
contrary, it was extraordinarily full of colour and interest. Mr. Archer's
criticism on this point, a criticism packed full of ignorance and built up by a
purely fictitious construction of what things logically ought to have been on
the theory of a dominating asceticism and belief in the illusionary character of
the world, is not and cannot be borne out by anyone who has come close to
the facts. It is true that while many European writers who have studied the
history of the land and the people, have expressed strongly their appreciation
of the vividness and interesting fullness, colour and beauty of life in India
before the present period,—that unhappily exists no longer except in the
pages of history and literature and the broken or crumbling fragments of the
past,—those who see only from a distance or fix their eyes only on one
aspect, speak of it often as a land of metaphysics, philosophies, dreams and
brooding imaginations, and certain artists and writers are apt to write in a
strain as if it were a country of the Arabian Nights, a mere glitter of strange
hues and fancies and marvels. But on the contrary India has been as much a
home of serious and solid realities, of a firm grappling with the problems of
thought and life, of measured and wise organisation and great action as any
other considerable centre of civilisation. The widely different view these
perceptions express simply show the many-sided brilliance and fullness of her
life. The colour and magnificence have been its aesthetic side; she has had
great dreams and high and splendid imaginations, for that too is wanted for
the completeness of our
Page 243

living; but also deep philosophical and religious thinking, a wide and searching
criticism of life, a great political and social order, a strong ethical tone and a
persistent vigour of individual and communal living. That is a combination
which means life in all its fullness, though deficient, it may be, except in
extraordinary cases, in the more violent egoistic perversities and
exaggerations which some minds seem to take for a proof of the highest
vigour of existence.
\par In what field indeed has not India attempted, achieved, created, and in all
on a large scale and yet with much attention to completeness of detail? Of
her spiritual and philosophic achievement there can be no real question. They
stand there as the Himalayas stand upon the earth in the phrase of Kalidasa,
\s{p\,rthivy\=a iva m\=anada\,n\,da\,h}, “as if earth's measuring rod,” mediating still
between earth and heaven, measuring the finite, casting their plummet far
into the infinite, plunging their extremities into the upper and lower seas of the
superconscient and the subliminal, the spiritual and the natural being. But if
her philosophies, her religious disciplines, her long list of great spiritual
personalities, thinkers, founders, saints are her greatest glory, as was natural
to her temperament and governing idea, they are by no means her sole
glories, nor are the others dwarfed by their eminence. It is now proved that in
science she went farther than any country before the modern era, and even
Europe owes the beginning of her physical science to India as much as to
Greece, although not directly but through the medium of the Arabs. And,
even if she had only gone as far, that would have been sufficient proof of a
strong intellectual life in an ancient culture. Especially in mathematics,
astronomy and chemistry, the chief elements of ancient science, she
discovered and formulated much and well and anticipated by force of
reasoning or experiment some of the scientific ideas and discoveries which
Europe first arrived at much later, but was able to base more firmly by her
new and completer method. She was well-equipped in surgery and her
system of medicine survives to this day and has still its value, though it
declined intermediately in knowledge and is only now recovering its vitality.
Page 244

\par In literature, in the life of the mind, she lived and built greatly. Not only
has she the Vedas, Upanishads and Gita, not to speak of less supreme but
still powerful or beautiful work in that field, unequalled monuments of
religious and philosophic poetry, a kind in which Europe has never been able
to do anything much of any great value, but that vast national structure, the
Mahabharata, gathering into its cycle the poetic literature and expressing so
completely the life of a long formative age, that it is said of it in a popular
saying which has the justice if also the exaggeration of a too apt epigram,
“What is not in this Bharata, is not in Bharatavarsha (India),” and the
Ramayana, the greatest and most remarkable poem of its kind, that most
sublime and beautiful epic of ethical idealism and a heroic semi-divine human
life, and the marvellous richness, fullness and colour of the poetry and
romance of highly cultured thought, sensuous enjoyment, imagination, action
and adventure which makes up the romantic literature of her classical epoch.
Nor did this long continuous vigour of creation cease with the loss of vitality
by the Sanskrit tongue, but was paralleled and carried on in a mass of great
or of beautiful work in her other languages, in Pali first and Prakrit, much
unfortunately lost,
\note{E.g. the once famous work in Paisachi of which the
\s{Kath\=asarits\=agara} is an inferior version.} and Tamil, afterwards in Hindi,
Bengali, Marathi and other tongues. The long tradition of her architecture,
sculpture and painting speaks for itself, even in what survives after all the
ruin of stormy centuries: whatever judgment may be formed of it by the
narrower school of Western aesthetics,—and at least its fineness of
execution and workmanship cannot be denied, nor the power with which it
renders the Indian mind,—it testifies at least to a continuous creative activity.
And creation is proof of life and great creation of greatness of life.
\par But these things are, it may be said, the things of the mind, and the
intellect, imagination and aesthetic mind of India may have been creatively
active, but yet her outward life depressed, dull, poor, gloomy with the hues of
asceticism, void of will-power and personality, ineffective, null. That would be
a hard
Page 245

proposition to swallow; for literature, art and science do not flourish in a void
of life. But here too what are the facts? India has not only had the long roll of
her great saints, sages, thinkers, religious founders, poets, creators, scientists,
scholars, legists; she has had her great rulers, administrators, soldiers,
conquerors, heroes, men with the strong active will, the mind that plans and
the seeing force that builds. She has warred and ruled, traded and colonised
and spread her civilisation, built polities and organised communities and
societies, done all that makes the outward activity of great peoples. A nation
tends to throw out its most vivid types in that line of action which is most
congenial to its temperament and expressive of its leading idea, and it is the
great saints and religious personalities that stand at the head in India and
present the most striking and continuous roll-call of greatness, just as Rome
lived most in her warriors and statesmen and rulers. The Rishi in ancient
India was the outstanding figure with the hero just behind, while in later times
the most striking feature is the long uninterrupted chain from Buddha and
Mahavira to Ramanuja, Chaitanya, Nanak, Ramdas and Tukaram and beyond
them to Ramakrishna and Vivekananda and Dayananda. But there have been
also the remarkable achievements of statesmen and rulers, from the first
dawn of ascertainable history which comes in with the striking figures of
Chandragupta, Chanakya, Asoka, the Gupta emperors and goes down
through the multitude of famous Hindu and Mahomedan figures of the middle
age to quite modern times. In ancient India there was the life of republics,
oligarchies, democracies, small kingdoms of which no detail of history now
survives, afterwards the long effort at empire-building, the colonisation of
Ceylon and the Archipelago, the vivid struggles that attended the rise and
decline of the Pathan and Mogul dynasties, the Hindu struggle for survival in
the south, the wonderful record of Rajput heroism and the great upheaval of
national life in Maharashtra penetrating to the lowest strata of society, the
remarkable episode of the Sikh Khalsa. An adequate picture of that outward
life still remains to be given; once given it would be the end of many fictions.
All this
Page 246

mass of action was not accomplished by men without mind and will and vital
force, by pale shadows of humanity in whom the vigorous manhood had been
crushed out under the burden of a gloomy and all-effacing asceticism, nor
does it look like the sign of a metaphysically minded people of dreamers
averse to life and action. It was not men of straw or lifeless and will-less
dummies or thin-blooded dreamers who thus acted, planned, conquered, built
great systems of administration, founded kingdoms and empires, figured as
great patrons of poetry and art and architecture or, later, resisted heroically
imperial power and fought for the freedom of clan or people. Nor was it a
nation devoid of life which maintained its existence and culture and still lived
on and broke out constantly into new revivals under the ever increasing stress
of continuously adverse circumstances. The modern Indian revival, religious,
cultural, political, called now sometimes a renaissance, which so troubles and
grieves the minds of her critics, is only a repetition under altered
circumstances, in an adapted form, in a greater though as yet less vivid mass
of movement, of a phenomenon which has constantly repeated itself
throughout a millennium of Indian history.
\par And it must be remembered that by virtue of its culture and its system
the whole nation shared in the common life. In all countries in the past the
mass has indeed lived with a less active and vivid force than the
few,—sometimes with the mere elements of life, not with even any beginning
of finished richness,—nor has modern civilisation yet got rid of this disparity,
though it has opened the advantages or at least the initial opportunities of a
first-hand life and thought and knowledge to a greater number. But in ancient
India, though the higher classes led and had the lion's share of the force and
wealth of life, the people too lived and until much later times intensely though
on a lesser scale and with a more diffused and less concentrated force. Their
religious life was more intense than that of any other country; they drank in
with remarkable facility the thoughts of the philosophers and the influence of
the saints; they heard and followed Buddha and the many who came after
him; they were taught by the Sannyasins and sang the songs of the Bhaktas
and
Page 247

Bauls and thus possessed some of the most delicate and beautiful poetical
literature ever produced; they contributed many of the greatest names in our
religion, and from the outcastes themselves came saints revered by the whole
community. In ancient Hindu times they had their share of political life and
power; they were the people, the \s{vi\'sa\,h} of the Veda, of whom the kings
were the leaders and from them as well as from the sacred or princely
families were born the Rishis; they held their villages as little
self-administered republics; in the time of the great kingdoms and empires
they sat in the municipalities and urban councils and the bulk of the typical
royal Council described in the books of political science was composed of
commoners, Vaishyas, and not of Brahmin Pundits and Kshatriya nobles; for
a long time they could impose their will on their kings, without the need of a
long struggle, by a single demonstration of their displeasure. So long as Hindu
kingdoms existed, something of all this survived, and even the entrance into
India of central Asian forms of absolutist despotism, never an indigenous
Indian growth, left some remnant of the old edifice still in being. The people
had their share too in art and poetry, their means by which the essence of
Indian culture was disseminated through the mass, a system of elementary
education in addition to the great universities of ancient times, a type of
popular dramatic representation which was in some parts of the country alive
even yesterday; they gave India her artists and architects and many of the
famous poets in the popular tongues; they preserved by the force of their long
past culture an innate aesthetic sense and faculty of which the work of Indian
craftsmen remained a constant and striking evidence until it was destroyed or
degraded by the vulgarisation and loss of aesthetic sense and beauty which
has been one of the results of modern civilisation. Nor was the life of India
ascetic, gloomy or sad, as the too logical mind of the critic would have it be.
The outward form is more quiet than in other countries, there is a certain
gravity and reserve before strangers which deceives the foreign observer,
and in recent times asceticism and poverty and an increase of puritanic
tendency had their effect, but the life portrayed in the literature of the country
is glad and
Page 248

vivid, and even now despite certain varieties of temperament and many
forces making for depression laughter, humour, an unobtrusive elasticity and
equanimity in the vicissitudes of life are very marked features of the Indian
character.
\par The whole theory of a want of life and will and activity in the Indian
people as a result of their culture is then a myth. The circumstances which
have given some colour to it in later times will be noted in their proper place;
but they are a feature of the decline and even then must be taken with
considerable qualification, and the much longer history of its past greatness
tells quite another story. That history has not been recorded in the European
fashion; for the art of history and biography, though not entirely neglected,
was never brought to perfection in India, never sufficiently practised, nor
does any sustained record of the doings of kings and great men and peoples
before the Mussulman dynasties survive except in the one solitary instance of
Cashmere. This is certainly a defect and leaves a very serious gap. India has
lived much, but has not sat down to record the history of her life. Her soul
and mind have left their great monuments, but so much as we know—and
after all it is not little—of the rest, the more outward things, remains or has
emerged recently in spite of her neglect; such exact records as she had, she
has allowed to rust forgotten or disappear. Perhaps what Mr. Archer really
means when he tells us that we have had no personalities in our history, is
that they do not come home to his mind because their doings and sayings are
not minutely recorded in the Western manner; their personality, will-power
and creative force emerge only in their work or in indicative tradition and
anecdote or in incomplete records. And very curiously, very fancifully this
defect has been set down to an ascetic want of interest in life; it is supposed
that India was so much absorbed in the eternal that she deliberately despised
and neglected time, so profoundly concentrated on the pursuit of ascetic
brooding and quietistic peace that she looked down on and took no interest in
the memory of action. That is another myth. The same phenomenon of a lack
of sustained and deliberate record appears in other ancient cultures, but
nobody
Page 249

suggests that Egypt, Assyria or Persia have to be reconstructed for us by the
archaeologists for an analogous reason. The genius of Greece developed the
art of history, though only in the later period of her activity, and Europe has
cherished and preserved the art; India and other ancient civilisations did not
arrive at it or neglected its full development. It is a defect, but there is no
reason why we should go out of our way in this one case to attribute it to a
deliberate motive or to any lack of interest in life. And in spite of the defect
the greatness and activity of the past life of India reveals itself and comes out
in bolder relief the more the inquiry into her past unearths the vast amount of
material still available.
\par But our critic will still have it that India lived as it were in spite of herself
and that in all this teeming action there is ample evidence of the dwarfing of
individual will and the absence of any great individual personality. He arrives
at that result by methods which savour of the skill of the journalist or
pamphleteer rather than the disinterested mind of the critic. He tells us for
instance that India has contributed only one or at most two great names to
the world's Pantheon. By that, of course, he means Europe's Pantheon, or the
world's Pantheon as constructed by the mind of Europe, crammed with the
figures of Western history and achievement which are near and familiar to it
and admitting only a very few of the more gigantic names from the distant
East, those which it finds it most difficult to ignore. One remembers the list
made by a great French poet in the field of literature in which a sounding
string of French names equals or outnumbers the whole contribution of the
rest of Europe! If an Indian were to set about the same task in the same
spirit, he would no doubt similarly pour out an interminable list of Indian
names with some great men of Europe and America, Arabia, Persia, China,
Japan forming a brief tail to this large peninsular body. These exercises of the
partial mentality have no value. And it is difficult to find out what measure of
values Mr. Archer is using when he relegates other great Indian names,
allowing for three or four only, to the second plan and even there belittles
them in comparison with corresponding European immortals. In what
Page 250

is Shivaji with his vivid and interesting life and character, who not only
founded a kingdom but organised a nation, inferior to Cromwell, or Shankara
whose great spirit in the few years of its mortal life swept triumphant through
India and reconstituted the whole religious life of her peoples, inferior as a
personality to Luther? Why are Chanakya and Chandragupta who laid down
the form of empire-building in India and whose great administrative system
survived with changes often for the worse down to modern times, lesser men
than the rulers and statesmen of European history? India may not present any
recorded moment of her life so crowded as the few years of Athens to which
Mr. Archer makes appeal; she may have no parallel to the swarm of
interesting but often disturbing, questionable or even dark and revolting
figures which illuminate and stain the story of the Italian cities during the
Renaissance, although she has had too her crowded moments thronged by
figures of a different kind. But she has had many rulers, statesmen and
encouragers of art as great in their own way as Pericles or Lorenzo di
Medici; the personalities of her famed poets emerge more dimly through the
mist of time, but with indications which point to a lofty spirit or a humanity as
great as that of Aeschylus or Euripides or a life-story as human and
interesting as that of the famous Italian poets. And if, comparing this one
country with all Europe as Mr. Archer insists,—mainly on the ground that
Indians themselves make the comparison when they speak of the size of the
country, its many races and the difficulty so long experienced in organising
Indian unity,—it may be that in the field of political and military action Europe
has a long lead, but what of the unparalleled profusion of great spiritual
personalities in which India is preeminent? Again Mr. Archer speaks with
arrogant depreciation of the significant figures born of the creative Indian
mind which people its literature and its drama. Here too it is difficult to follow
him or to accept his measure of values. To an oriental mind at least Rama
and Ravana are as vivid and great and real characters as the personalities of
Homer and Shakespeare, Sita and Draupadi certainly not less living than
Helen or Cleopatra, Damayanti and Shakuntala and other feminine types not
less
Page 251

sweet, gracious and alive than Alcestis or Desdemona. I am not here
affirming any superiority, but the bottomless inequality and inferiority which
this critic affirms exists, not in truth, but only in his imagination or his way of
seeing.
\par That perhaps is the one thing of significance, the one thing which is
really worth noting, the difference of mentality which is at the bottom of
these comparisons. There is not any inferiority of life or force or active and
reactive will but, as far as the sameness of human nature allows, a difference
of type, character, personality, let us say, an emphasis in different and almost
opposite directions. Will-power and personality have not been wanting in
India, but the direction preferably given to them and the type most admired
are of a different kind. The average European mind is prone to value or at
least to be more interested in the egoistic or self-asserting will which insists
upon itself with a strong or a bold, an aggressive, sometimes a fierce
insistence; the Indian mind not only prizes more from the ethical
standpoint,—that is found everywhere,—but is more vividly interested in the
calm, self-controlling or even the self-effacing personality; for the effacement
of egoism seems to it to be not an effacement, but an enhancement of value
and power of the true person and its greatness. Mr. Archer finds Asoka pale
and featureless; to an Indian mind he is supremely vivid and attractive. Why
is Asoka to be called pale in comparison with Charlemagne or, let us say,
with Constantine? Is it because he only mentions his sanguinary conquest of
Kalinga in order to speak of his remorse and the turning of his spirit, a
sentiment which Charlemagne massacring the Saxons in order to make good
Christians of them could not in the least have understood, nor any more
perhaps the Pope who anointed him? Constantine gave the victory to the
Christian religion, but there is nothing Christian in his personality; Asoka not
only enthroned Buddhism, but strove though not with a perfect success to
follow the path laid down by Buddha. And the Indian mind would account
him not only a nobler will, but a greater and more attracting personality than
Constantine or Charlemagne. It is interested in Chanakya, but much more
interested in Chaitanya.
Page 252

\par And in literature also just as in actual life it has the same turn. This
European mind finds Rama and Sita uninteresting and unreal, because they
are too virtuous, too ideal, too white in colour; but to the Indian mind even
apart from all religious sentiment they are figures of an absorbing reality
which appeal to the inmost fibres of our being. A European scholar criticising
the Mahabharata finds the strong and violent Bhima the only real character in
that great poem; the Indian mind on the contrary finds greater character and
a more moving interest in the calm and collected heroism of Arjuna, in the
fine ethical temperament of Yudhisthira, in the divine charioteer of
Kurukshetra who works not for his own hand but for the founding of the
kingdom of right and justice. Those vehement or self-asserting characters or
those driven by the storm of their passions which make the chief interest of
European epic and drama, would either be relegated by it to the second plan
or else, if set in large proportions, so brought in in order to bring into relief the
greatness of the higher type of personality, as Ravana contrasts with and sets
off Rama. The admiration of the one kind of mentality in the aesthetics of life
goes to the coloured, that of the other to the luminous personality. Or, to put it
in the form of the distinction made by the Indian mind itself, the interest of the
one centres more in the rajasic, that of the other in the sattwic will and
character.
\par Whether this difference imposes an inferiority on the aesthetics of Indian
life and creation, each must judge for himself, but surely the Indian is the
more evolved and spiritual conception. The Indian mind believes that the will
and personality are not diminished but heightened by moving from the rajasic
or more coloured egoistic to the sattwic and more luminous level of our being.
Are not after all calm, self-mastery, a high balance signs of a greater and
more real force of character than mere self-assertion of strength of will or
the furious driving of the passions? Their possession does not mean that one
must act with an inferior or less puissant, but only with a more right, collected
and balanced will. And it is a mistake to think that asceticism itself rightly
understood and practised implies an effacement
Page 253

of will; it brings much rather its greater concentration. That is the Indian view
and experience and the meaning of the old legends in the epics—to which
Mr. Archer, misunderstanding the idea behind them, violently
objects,—attributing so enormous a force, even when it was misused, to the
power gained by ascetic self-mastery, Tapasya. The Indian mind believed
and still believes that soul power is a greater thing, works from a mightier
centre of will and has greater results than a more outwardly and materially
active will-force. But it will be said that India has valued most the impersonal
and that must obviously discourage personality. But this too,—except for the
negative ideal of losing oneself in the trance or the silence of the Eternal,
which is not the true essence of the matter,—involves a misconception.
However paradoxical it may sound, one finds actually that the acceptance of
the eternal and impersonal behind one's being and action and the attempt at
unity with it is precisely the thing that carries the person to his largest
greatness and power. For this impersonality is not a nullity, but an oceanic
totality of the being. The perfect man, the Siddha or the Buddha, becomes
universal, embraces all being in sympathy and oneness, finds himself in others
as in himself and by so doing draws into himself at the same time something
of the infinite power of a universal energy. That is the positive ideal of Indian
culture. And when this hostile critic finds himself forced to do homage to the
superiority of certain personalities who have sprung from this “fine-spun
aristocratic” culture, he is really paying a tribute to some results of this
preference of the sattwic to the rajasic, the universal to the limited and
egoistic man. Not to be as the common man, that is to say, as the crude
natural or half-baked human being, was indeed the sense of this ancient
endeavour and in that sense it may be called an aristocratic culture. But it
was not a vulgar outward but a spiritual nobility which was the aim of its
self-discipline. Indian life, personality, art, literature must be judged in this
light and appreciated or depreciated after being seen in the real sense and
with the right understanding of Indian culture.
Page 254

\par
\hn XII
\par
\ht Indian Art
\par\drop A good deal of hostile or unsympathetic Western criticism of Indian
civilisation has been directed in the past against its aesthetic side and taken
the form of a disdainful or violent depreciation of its fine arts, architecture,
sculpture and painting. Mr. Archer would not find much support in his
wholesale and undiscriminating depreciation of a great literature, but here too
there has been, if not positive attack, much failure of understanding; but in the
attack on Indian art, his is the last and shrillest of many hostile voices. This
aesthetic side of a people's culture is of the highest importance and demands
almost as much scrutiny and carefulness of appreciation as the philosophy,
religion and central formative ideas which have been the foundation of Indian
life and of which much of the art and literature is a conscious expression in
significant aesthetic forms. Fortunately, a considerable amount of work has
been already done in the clearing away of misconceptions about Indian
sculpture and painting and, if that were all, I might be content to refer to the
works of Mr. Havell and Dr. Coomaraswamy or to the sufficiently
understanding though less deeply informed and penetrating criticisms of
others who cannot be charged with a prepossession in favour of oriental
work. But a more general and searching consideration of first principles is
called for in any complete view of the essential motives of Indian culture. I
am appealing mainly to that new mind of India which long misled by an alien
education, view and influence is returning to a sound and true idea of its past
and future; but in this field the return is far from being as pervading, complete
or luminous as it should be. I shall confine myself therefore first to a
consideration of the sources of misunderstanding and pass from that to the
true cultural significance of Indian aesthetic creation.
\par Mr. Archer pursuing his policy of Thorough devotes a whole
Page 255

chapter to the subject. This chapter is one long torrent of sweeping
denunciation. But it would be a waste of time to take his attack as serious
criticism and answer all in detail. His reply to defenders and eulogists is
amazing in its shallowness and triviality, made up mostly of small, feeble and
sometimes irrelevant points, big glaring epithets and forcibly senseless
phrases, based for the rest on a misunderstanding or a sheer inability to
conceive the meaning of spiritual experiences and metaphysical ideas, which
betrays an entire absence of the religious sense and the philosophic mind. Mr.
Archer is of course a rationalist and contemner of philosophy and entitled to
his deficiencies; but why then try to judge things into the sense of which one
is unable to enter and exhibit the spectacle of a blind man discoursing on
colours? I will cite one or two instances which will show the quality of his
criticism and amply justify a refusal to attach any positive value to the actual
points he labours to make, except for the light they throw on the psychology
of the objectors.
\par I will give first an instance amazing in its ineptitude. The Indian ideal
figure of the masculine body insists on two features among many, a
characteristic width at the shoulders and slenderness in the middle. Well, an
objection to broadness of girth and largeness of belly—allowed only where
they are appropriate as in sculptures of Ganesha or the Yakshas—is not
peculiar to the Indian aesthetic sense; an emphasis, even a pronounced
emphasis on their opposites is surely intelligible enough as an aesthetic
tradition, however some may prefer a more realistic and prosperous
presentation of the human figure. But Indian poets and authorities on art have
given in this connection the simile of the lion, and lo and behold Mr. Archer
solemnly discoursing on this image as a plain proof that the Indian people
were only just out of the semi-savage state! It is only too clear that they drew
the ideal of heroic manhood from their native jungle, from theriolatry, that is
to say, from a worship of wild beasts! I presume, on the same principle and
with the same stupefying ingenuity he would find in Kamban's image of the
sea for the colour and depth of Sita's eyes clear evidence of a still more
primitive savagery and barbaric worship of inanimate
Page 256

nature, or in Valmiki's description of his heroine's “eyes like wine”,
\s{madirek\,sa\,n\=a}, evidence of a chronic inebriety and the semi-drunken
inspiration of the Indian poetic mind. This is one example of Mr. Archer's
most telling points. It is by no means an isolated though it is an extreme
specimen, and the absurdity of that particular argument only brings out the
triviality of this manner of criticism. It is on a par with the common objection
to the slim hands and feet loved of the Bengal painters which one hears
sometimes advanced as a solid condemnation of their work. And that can be
pardoned in the average man who under the high dispensation of modern
culture is not expected to have any intelligent conception about art,—the
instinctive appreciation has been already safely killed and buried. But what
are we to say of a professed critic who ignores the deeper motives and
fastens on details in order to give them this kind of significance?
\par But there are more grave and important objections in this criticism; for
Mr. Archer turns also to deal with philosophy in art. The whole basis of
Indian artistic creation, perfectly conscious and recognised in the canons, is
directly spiritual and intuitive. Mr. Havell rightly lays stress on this essential
distinction and speaks in passing of the infinite superiority of the method of
direct perception over intellect, an assertion naturally offensive to the
rationalistic mind, though it is now increasingly affirmed by leading Western
thinkers. Mr. Archer at once starts out to hack at it with a very blunt
tomahawk. How does he deal with this crucial matter? In a way which
misses the whole real point and has nothing whatever to do with the
philosophy of art. He fastens on Mr. Havell's coupling of the master intuition
of Buddha with the great intuition of Newton and objects to the parallel
because the two discoveries deal with two different orders of knowledge, one
scientific and physical, the other mental or psychic, spiritual or philosophic in
nature. He trots out from its stable the old objection that Newton's intuition
was only the last step in a long intellectual process, while according to this
positive psychologist and philosophic critic the intuitions of Buddha and other
Indian sages had no basis in any intellectual process of any kind or any
verifiable experience. It is on the
Page 257

contrary the simple fact, well-known to all who know anything of the subject,
that the conclusions of Buddha and other Indian philosophers (I am not now
speaking of the inspired thought of the Upanishads which was pure spiritual
experience enlightened by intuition and gnosis,) were preceded by a very
acute scrutiny of relevant psychological phenomena and a process of
reasoning which, though certainly not rationalistic, was as rational as any
other method of thinking. He clinches his refutation by the sage remark that
these intuitions which he chooses to call fantasies contradict one another and
therefore, it seems, have no sort of value except their vain metaphysical
subtlety. Are we to conclude that the patient study of phenomena, the
scrupulous and rigidly verifiable intellectual reasonings and conclusions of
Western scientists have led to no conflicting or contradictory results? One
could never imagine at this rate that the science of heredity is torn by
conflicting “fantasies” or that Newton's “fantasies” about space and
gravitational effect on space are at this day in danger of being upset by
Einstein's “fantasies” in the same field. It is a minor matter that Mr. Archer
happens to be wrong in his idea of Buddha's intuition when he says that he
would have rejected a certain Vedantic intuition, since Buddha neither
accepted nor rejected, but simply refused at all to speculate on the supreme
cause. His intuition was confined to the cause of sorrow and the
impermanence of things and the release by extinction of ego, desire and
Sanskara, and so far as he chose to go, his intuition of this extinction,
Nirvana, and the Vedantic intuition of the supreme unity were the seeing of
one truth of spiritual experience, seen no doubt from different angles of vision
and couched in different intellectual forms, but with a common intuitive
substance. The rest was foreign to Buddha's rigidly practical purpose. All this
leads us far afield from our subject, but our critic has a remarkably confused
mind and to follow him is to be condemned to divagate.
\par Thus far Mr. Archer on intuition. This is the character of his excursions
on first principles in art. Is it really necessary to point out that a power of
mind or spirit may be the same and yet act differently in different fields? or
that a certain kind of intuition
Page 258

may be prepared by a long intellectual training, but that does not make it a
last step in an intellectual process, any more than the precedence of sense
activity makes intellectual reasoning a last step of sense-perception? The
reason overtops sense and admits us to other and subtler ranges of truth; the
intuition similarly overtops reason and admits us to a more direct and
luminous power of truth. But very obviously in the use of the intuition the poet
and artist cannot proceed precisely in the same way as the scientist or
philosopher. Leonardo da Vinci's remarkable intuitions in science and his
creative intuitions in art started from the same power, but the surrounding or
subordinate mental operations were of a different character and colour. And
in art itself there are different kinds of intuition. Shakespeare's seeing of life
differs in its character and aims from Balzac's or Ibsen's, but the essential
part of the process, that which makes it intuitive, is the same. The Buddhistic,
the Vedantic seeing of things may be equally powerful starting-points for
artistic creation, may lead one to the calm of a Buddha or the other to the
rapture dance or majestic stillness of Shiva, and it is quite indifferent to the
purposes of art to which of them the metaphysician may be inclined to give a
logical preference. These are elementary notions and it is not surprising that
one who ignores them should misunderstand the strong and subtle artistic
creations of India.
\par The weakness of Mr. Archer's attack, its empty noise and violence and
exiguity of substance must not blind us to the very real importance of the
mental outlook from which his dislike of Indian art proceeds. For the outlook
and the dislike it generates are rooted in something deeper than themselves, a
whole cultural training, natural or acquired temperament and fundamental
attitude towards existence, and it measures, if the immeasurable can be
measured, the width of the gulf which till recently separated the oriental and
the Western mind and most of all the European and the Indian way of seeing
things. An inability to understand the motives and methods of Indian art and a
contempt of or repulsion from it was almost universal till yesterday in the
mind of Europe. There was little
Page 259

difference in this regard between the average man bound by his customary
first notions and the competent critic trained to appreciate different forms of
culture. The gulf was too wide for any bridge of culture then built to span. To
the European mind Indian art was a thing barbarous, immature, monstrous, an
arrested growth from humanity's primitive savagery and incompetent
childhood. If there has been now some change, it is due to the remarkably
sudden widening of the horizon and view of European culture, a partial
shifting even of the standpoint from which it was accustomed to see and
judge all that it saw. In matters of art the Western mind was long bound up
as in a prison in the Greek and Renascence tradition modified by a later
mentality with only two side rooms of escape, the romantic and the realistic
motives, but these were only wings of the same building; for the base was the
same and a common essential canon united their variations. The conventional
superstition of the imitation of Nature as the first law or the limiting rule of art
governed even the freest work and gave its tone to the artistic and critical
intelligence. The canons of Western artistic creation were held to be the sole
valid criteria and everything else was regarded as primitive and
half-developed or else strange and fantastic and interesting only by its
curiosity. But a remarkable change has begun to set in, even though the old
ideas still largely rule. The prison, if not broken, has at least had a wide
breach made in it; a more flexible vision and a more profound imagination
have begun to superimpose themselves on the old ingrained attitude. As a
result, and as a contributing influence towards this change, oriental or at any
rate Chinese and Japanese art has begun to command something like
adequate recognition.
\par But the change has not yet gone far enough for a thorough appreciation
of the deepest and most characteristic spirit and inspiration of Indian work.
An eye or an effort like Mr. Havell's is still rare. For the most part even the
most sympathetic criticism stops short at a technical appreciation and
imaginative sympathy which tries to understand from outside and penetrates
into so much only of the artistic suggestion
Page 260

as can be at once seized by the new wider view of a more accomplished and
flexible critical mentality. But there is little sign of the understanding of the
very well-spring and spiritual fountain of Indian artistic creation. There is
therefore still a utility in fathoming the depths and causes of the divergence.
That is especially necessary for the Indian mind itself, for by the appreciation
excited by an opposing view it will be better able to understand itself and
especially to seize what is essential in Indian art and must be clung to in the
future and what is an incident or a phase of growth and can be shed in the
advance to a new creation. This is properly a task for those who have
themselves at once the creative insight, the technical competence and the
seeing critical eye. But everyone who has at all the Indian spirit and feeling,
can at least give some account of the main, the central things which
constitute for him the appeal of Indian painting, sculpture and architecture.
This is all that I shall attempt, for it will be in itself the best defence and
justification of Indian culture on its side of aesthetic significance.
\par The criticism of art is a vain and dead thing when it ignores the spirit,
aim, essential motive from which a type of artistic creation starts and judges
by the external details only in the light of a quite different spirit, aim and
motive. Once we understand the essential things, enter into the characteristic
way and spirit, are able to interpret the form and execution from that inner
centre, we can then see how it looks in the light of other standpoints, in the
light of the comparative mind. A comparative criticism has its use, but the
essential understanding must precede it if it is to have any real value. But
while this is comparatively easy in the wider and more flexible turn of
literature, it is, I think, more difficult in the other arts, when the difference of
spirit is deep, because there the absence of the mediating word, the necessity
of proceeding direct from spirit to line and form brings about a special
intensity and exclusive concentration of aim and stress of execution. The
intensity of the thing that moves the work is brought out with a more distinct
power, but by its very stress and directness allows of
Page 261

few accommodations and combined variations of appeal. The thing meant
and the thing done strike deep home into the soul or the imaginative mind, but
touch it over a smaller surface and with a lesser multitude of points of
contact. But whatever the reason, it is less easy for a different kind of mind
to appreciate.
\par The Indian mind in its natural poise finds it almost or quite as difficult
really, that is to say, spiritually to understand the arts of Europe, as the
ordinary European mind to enter into the spirit of Indian painting and
sculpture. I have seen a comparison made between a feminine Indian figure
and a Greek Aphrodite which illustrates the difficulty in an extreme form.
The critic tells me that the Indian figure is full of a strong spiritual
sense—here of the very breath and being of devotion, an ineffable devotion,
and that is true, it is a suggestion or even a revelation which breaks through
or overflows the form rather than depends on the external work,—but the
Greek creation can only awaken a sublimated carnal or sensuous delight.
Now having entered somewhat into the heart of meaning of Greek sculpture,
I can see that this is a wrong account of the matter. The critic has got into
the real spirit of the Indian, but not into the real spirit of the Greek work; his
criticism from that moment, as a comparative appreciation, loses all value.
The Greek figure stresses no doubt the body, but appeals through it to an
imaginative seeing inspiration which aims at expressing a certain divine
power of beauty and gives us therefore something which is much more than
a merely sensuous aesthetic pleasure. If the artist has done this with
perfection, the work has accomplished its aim and ranks as a masterpiece.
The Indian sculptor stresses something behind, something more remote to the
surface imagination, but nearer to the soul, and subordinates to it the physical
form. If he has only partially succeeded or done it with power but with
something faulty in the execution, his work is less great, even though it may
have a greater spirit in the intention: but when he wholly succeeds, then his
work too is a masterpiece, and we may prefer it with a good conscience, if
the spiritual, the higher intuitive vision is what we most demand from art. This
however
Page 262

need not interfere with an appreciation of both kinds in their own order.
\par But in viewing much of other European work of the very greatest repute,
I am myself aware of a failure of spiritual sympathy. I look for instance on
some of the most famed pieces of Tintoretto,—not the portraits, for those
give the soul, if only the active or character soul in the man, but say, the
Adam and Eve, the St. George slaying the dragon, the Christ appearing to
Venetian Senators, and I am aware of standing baffled and stopped by an
irresponsive blankness somewhere in my being. I can see the magnificence
and power of colouring and design, I can see the force of externalised
imagination or the spirited dramatic rendering of action, but I strive in vain to
get out any significance below the surface or equivalent to the greatness of
the form, except perhaps an incidental minor suggestion here and there and
that is not sufficient for me. When I try to analyse my failure, I find at first
certain conceptions which conflict with my expectation or my own way of
seeing. This muscular Adam, the sensuous beauty of this Eve do not bring
home to me the mother or the father of the race, this dragon seems to me
only a surly portentous beast in great danger of being killed, not a creative
embodiment of monstrous evil, this Christ with his massive body and
benevolent philosophic visage almost offends me, is not at any rate the Christ
whom I know. But these are after all incidental things; what is really the
matter is that I come to this art with a previous demand for a kind of vision,
imagination, emotion, significance which it cannot give me. And not being so
self-confident as to think that what commands the admiration of the greatest
critics and artists is not admirable, I can see this and pause on the verge of
applying Mr. Archer's criticism of certain Indian work and saying that the
mere execution is beautiful or marvellous but there is no imagination, nothing
beyond what is on the surface. I can understand that what is wanting is really
the kind of imagination I personally demand; but though my acquired cultured
mind explains this to me and may intellectually catch at the something more,
my natural being will not be satisfied,
Page 263

I am oppressed, not uplifted by this triumph of life and the flesh and of the
power and stir of life,—not that I object to these things in themselves or to
the greatest emphasis on the sensuous or even the sensual, elements not at all
absent from Indian creation, if I can get something at least of the deeper
thing I want behind it,—and I find myself turning away from the work of one
of the greatest Italian masters to satisfy myself with some “barbaric” Indian
painting or statue, some calm unfathomable Buddha, bronze Shiva or
eighteen-armed Durga slaying the Asuras. But the cause of my failure is
there, that I am seeking for something which was not meant in the spirit of
this art and which I ought not to expect from its characteristic creation. And
if I had steeped myself in this Renascence mind as in the original Hellenic
spirit, I could have added something to my inner experience and acquired a
more catholic and universal aesthesis.
\par I lay stress on this psychological misunderstanding or want of
understanding, because it explains the attitude of the natural European mind
to the great works of Indian art and puts on it its right value. This mind
catches only what is kin to European effort and regards that too as inferior,
naturally and quite rightly since the same thing is more sincerely and perfectly
done from a more native fountain of power in Western work. That explains
the amazing preference of better informed critics than Mr. Archer for the
bastard Gandharan sculpture to great and sincere work original and true in its
unity,—Gandharan sculpture which is an unsatisfying, almost an impotent
junction of two incompatible motives, incompatible at least if one is not fused
into the other as here certainly it is not fused,—or its praise otherwise
incomprehensible of certain second-rate or third-rate creations and its turning
away from others noble and profound but strange to its conceptions. Or else
it seizes with appreciation—but is it really a total and a deeply understanding
appreciation?—on work like the Indo-Saracenic which though in no way akin
to Western types has yet the power at certain points to get within the
outskirts of its circle of aesthetic conceptions. It is even so much struck by
the Taj as to
Page 264

try to believe that it is the work of an Italian sculptor, some astonishing
genius, no doubt, who Indianised himself miraculously in this one hour of
solitary achievement, for India is a land of miracles,—and probably died of
the effort, for he has left us no other work to admire. Again it admires, at
least in Mr. Archer, Javanese work because of its humanity and even
concludes from that that it is not Indian. Its essential unity with Indian work
behind the variation of manner is invisible to this mind because the spirit and
inner meaning of Indian work is a blank to its vision and it sees only a form, a
notation of the meaning, which, therefore, it does not understand and dislikes.
One might just as well say that the Gita written in the Devanagari is a
barbaric, monstrous or meaningless thing, but put into some cursive character
at once becomes not Indian, because human and intelligible!
\par But, ordinarily, place this mind before anything ancient, Hindu, Buddhistic
or Vedantic in art and it looks at it with a blank or an angry incomprehension.
It looks for the sense and does not find any, because either it has not in itself
the experience and finds it difficult to have the imagination, much more the
realisation of what this art does really mean and express, or because it insists
on looking for what it is accustomed to see at home and, not finding that, is
convinced that there is nothing to see or nothing of any value. Or else if there
is something which it could have understood, it does not understand because
it is expressed in the Indian form and the Indian way. It looks at the method
and form and finds it unfamiliar, contrary to its own canons, is revolted,
contemptuous, repelled, speaks of the thing as monstrous, barbarous, ugly or
null, passes on in a high dislike or disdain. Or if it is overborne by some sense
of unanalysable beauty of greatness or power it still speaks of a splendid
barbarism. Do you want an illuminating instance of this blankness of
comprehension? Mr. Archer sees the Dhyani Buddha with its supreme, its
unfathomable, its infinite spiritual calm which every cultured oriental mind can
at once feel and respond to in the depths of his being, and he denies that
there is anything,—only drooped eyelids, an
Page 265

immobile pose and an insipid, by which I suppose he means a calm
passionless face.
\note{In a note Mr. Archer mentions and very rightly discounts an absurd
apology for these Buddhas, viz., that the greatness and spirituality are not at
all in the work, but in the devotion of the artist! If the artist cannot put into his
work what was in him—and here it is not devotion that is expressed,—his
work is a futile abortion. But if he has expressed what he has felt, the
capacity to feel it must also be there in the mind that looks at his work.} He
turns for comfort to the Hellenic nobility of expression of the Gandharan
Buddha, or to the living Rabindranath Tagore more spiritual than any Buddha
from Peshawar to Kamakura, an inept misuse of comparison against which I
imagine the great poet himself would be the first to protest. There we have
the total incomprehension, the blind window, the blocked door in the mind,
and there too the reason why the natural Western mentality comes to Indian
art with a demand for something other than what its characteristic spirit and
motive intend to give, and, demanding that, is not prepared to enter into
another kind of spiritual experience and another range of creative sight,
imaginative power and mode of self-expression.
\par This once understood, we can turn to the difference in the spirit and
method of artistic creation which has given rise to the mutual
incomprehension; for that will bring us to the positive side of the matter. All
great artistic work proceeds from an act of intuition, not really an intellectual
idea or a splendid imagination,—these are only mental translations,—but a
direct intuition of some truth of life or being, some significant form of that
truth, some development of it in the mind of man. And so far there is no
difference between great European and great Indian work. Where then
begins the immense divergence? It is there in everything else, in the object
and field of the intuitive vision, in the method of working out the sight or
suggestion, in the part taken in the rendering by the external form and
technique, in the whole way of the rendering to the human mind, even in the
centre of our being to which the work appeals. The European artist gets his
intuition by a suggestion from an appearance in life and Nature or, if it starts
from something
Page 266

in his own soul, relates it at once to an external support. He brings down that
intuition into his normal mind and sets the intellectual idea and the imagination
in the intelligence to clothe it with a mental stuff which will render its form to
the moved reason, emotion, aesthesis. Then he missions his eye and hand to
execute it in terms which start from a colourable “imitation” of life and
Nature—and in ordinary hands too often end there—to get at an
interpretation that really changes it into the image of something not outward
in our own being or in universal being which was the real thing seen. And to
that in looking at the work we have to get back through colour and line and
disposition or whatever else may be part of the external means, to their
mental suggestions and through them to the soul of the whole matter. The
appeal is not direct to the eye of the deepest self and spirit within, but to the
outward soul by a strong awakening of the sensuous, the vital, the emotional,
the intellectual and imaginative being, and of the spiritual we get as much or
as little as can suit itself to and express itself through the outward man. Life,
action, passion, emotion, idea, Nature seen for their own sake and for an
aesthetic delight in them, these are the object and field of this creative
intuition. The something more which the Indian mind knows to be behind
these things looks out, if at all, from behind many veils. The direct and
unveiled presence of the Infinite and its godheads is not evoked or thought
necessary to the greater greatness and the highest perfection.
\par The theory of ancient Indian art at its greatest—and the greatest gives
its character to the rest and throws on it something of its stamp and
influence—is of another kind. Its highest business is to disclose something of
the Self, the Infinite, the Divine to the regard of the soul, the Self through its
expressions, the Infinite through its living finite symbols, the Divine through
his powers. Or the Godheads are to be revealed, luminously interpreted or in
some way suggested to the soul's understanding or to its devotion or at the
very least to a spiritually or religiously aesthetic emotion. When this hieratic
art comes down from these altitudes to the intermediate worlds behind ours,
to the lesser godheads or genii, it still carries into them some power or some
Page 267

hint from above. And when it comes quite down to the material world and the
life of man and the things of external Nature, it does not altogether get rid of
the greater vision, the hieratic stamp, the spiritual seeing, and in most good
work—except in moments of relaxation and a humorous or vivid play with
the obvious—there is always something more in which the seeing
presentation of life floats as in an immaterial atmosphere. Life is seen in the
self or in some suggestion of the infinite or of something beyond or there is at
least a touch and influence of these which helps to shape the presentation. It
is not that all Indian work realises this ideal; there is plenty no doubt that falls
short, is lowered, ineffective or even debased, but it is the best and the most
characteristic influence and execution which gives its tone to an art and by
which we must judge. Indian art in fact is identical in its spiritual aim and
principle with the rest of Indian culture.
\par A seeing in the self accordingly becomes the characteristic method of
the Indian artist and it is directly enjoined on him by the canon. He has to see
first in his spiritual being the truth of the thing he must express and to create
its form in his intuitive mind; he is not bound to look out first on outward life
and Nature for his model, his authority, his rule, his teacher or his fountain of
suggestions. Why should he when it is something quite inward he has to bring
out into expression? It is not an idea in the intellect, a mental imagination, an
outward emotion on which he has to depend for his stimulants, but an idea,
image, emotion of the spirit, and the mental equivalents are subordinate things
for help in the transmission and give only a part of the colouring and the
shape. A material form, colour, line and design are his physical means of the
expression, but in using them he is not bound to an imitation of Nature, but
has to make the form and all else significant of his vision, and if that can only
be done or can best be done by some modification, some pose, some touch or
symbolic variation which is not found in physical Nature, he is at perfect
liberty to use it, since truth to his vision, the unity of the thing he is seeing and
expressing is his only business. The line, colour and the rest are not his first,
but his
Page 268

last preoccupation, because they have to carry on them a world of things
which have already taken spiritual form in his mind. He has not for instance
to re-create for us the human face and body of the Buddha or some one
passion or incident of his life, but to reveal the calm of Nirvana through a
figure of the Buddha, and every detail and accessory must be turned into a
means or an aid of his purpose. And even when it is some human passion or
incident he has to portray, it is not usually that alone, but also or more
something else in the soul to which it points or from which it starts or some
power behind the action that has to enter into the spirit of his design and is
often really the main thing. And through the eye that looks on his work he has
to appeal not merely to an excitement of the outward soul, but to the inner
self, \s{antar\=atman}. One may well say that beyond the ordinary cultivation
of the aesthetic instinct necessary to all artistic appreciation there is a
spiritual insight or culture needed if we are to enter into the whole meaning of
Indian artistic creation, otherwise we get only at the surface external things
or at the most at things only just below the surface. It is an intuitive and
spiritual art and must be seen with the intuitive and spiritual eye.
\par This is the distinctive character of Indian art and to ignore it is to fall into
total incomprehension or into much misunderstanding. Indian architecture,
painting, sculpture are not only intimately one in inspiration with the central
things in Indian philosophy, religion, Yoga, culture, but a specially intense
expression of their significance. There is much in the literature which can be
well enough appreciated without any very deep entry into these things, but it
is comparatively a very small part of what is left of the other arts, Hindu or
Buddhistic, of which this can be said. They have been very largely a hieratic
aesthetic script of India's spiritual, contemplative and religious experience.
Page 269

\par
\hn XIII
\par
\ht Indian Art–2
\par\drop Architecture, sculpture and painting, because they are the three
great arts which appeal to the spirit through the eye, are those too in which
the sensible and the invisible meet with the strongest emphasis on themselves
and yet the greatest necessity of each other. The form with its insistent
masses, proportions, lines, colours, can here only justify them by their service
for the something intangible it has to express; the spirit needs all the possible
help of the material body to interpret itself to itself through the eye, yet asks
of it that it shall be as transparent a veil as possible of its own greater
significance. The art of the East and the art of the West—each in its
characteristic or mean, for there are always exceptions,—deal with the
problem of these two interlocking powers in a quite different way. The
Western mind is arrested and attracted by the form, lingers on it and cannot
get away from its charm, loves it for its own beauty, rests on the emotional,
intellectual, aesthetic suggestions that arise directly from its most visible
language, confines the soul in the body; it might almost be said that for this
mind form creates the spirit, the spirit depends for its existence and for
everything it has to say on the form. The Indian attitude to the matter is at the
opposite pole to this view. For the Indian mind form does not exist except as
a creation of the spirit and draws all its meaning and value from the spirit.
Every line, arrangement of mass, colour, shape, posture, every physical
suggestion, however many, crowded, opulent they may be, is first and last a
suggestion, a hint, very often a symbol which is in its main function a support
for a spiritual emotion, idea, image that again goes beyond itself to the less
definable, but more powerfully sensible reality of the spirit which has excited
these movements in the aesthetic mind and passed through them into
significant shapes.
Page 270

\par This characteristic attitude of the Indian reflective and creative mind
necessitates in our view of its creations an effort to get beyond at once to the
inner spirit of the reality it expresses and see from it and not from outside.
And in fact to start from the physical details and their synthesis appears to
me quite the wrong way to look at an Indian work of art. The orthodox style
of Western criticism seems to be to dwell scrutinisingly on the technique, on
form, on the obvious story of the form, and then pass to some appreciation of
beautiful or impressive emotion and idea. It is only in some deeper and more
sensitive minds that we get beyond that depth into profounder things. A
criticism of that kind applied to Indian art leaves it barren or poor of
significance. Here the only right way is to get at once through a total intuitive
or revelatory impression or by some meditative dwelling on the whole,
\s{dhy\=ana} in the technical Indian term, to the spiritual meaning and
atmosphere, make ourselves one with that as completely as possible, and then
only the helpful meaning and value of all the rest comes out with a complete
and revealing force. For here it is the spirit that carries the form, while in
most Western art it is the form that carries whatever there may be of spirit.
The striking phrase of Epictetus recurs to the mind in which he describes
man as a little soul carrying a corpse, {\it psucharion ei bastazon nekron}.
The more ordinary Western outlook is upon animate matter carrying in its life
a modicum of soul. But the seeing of the Indian mind and of Indian art is that
of a great, a limitless self and spirit, \s{mah\=an \=atm\=a}, which carries to us in
the sea of its presence a living shape of itself, small in comparison to its own
infinity, but yet sufficient by the power that informs this symbol to support
some aspect of that infinite's self-expression. It is therefore essential that we
should look here not solely with the physical eye informed by the reason and
the aesthetic imagination, but make the physical seeing a passage to the
opening of the inner spiritual eye and a moved communion in the soul. A
great oriental work of art does not easily reveal its secret to one who comes
to it solely in a mood of aesthetic curiosity or with a considering critical
objective mind, still less as the cultivated and interested tourist
Page 271

passing among strange and foreign things; but it has to be seen in loneliness,
in the solitude of one's self, in moments when one is capable of long and deep
meditation and as little weighted as possible with the conventions of material
life. That is why the Japanese with their fine sense in these things,—a sense
which modern Europe with her assault of crowded art galleries and
over-pictured walls seems to have quite lost, though perhaps I am wrong, and
those are the right conditions for display of European art,—have put their
temples and their Buddhas as often as possible away on mountains and in
distant or secluded scenes of Nature and avoid living with great paintings in
the crude hours of daily life, but keep them by preference in such a way that
their undisputed suggestion can sink into the mind in its finer moments or
apart where they can go and look at them in a treasured secrecy when the
soul is at leisure from life. That is an indication of the utmost value pointing to
the nature of the appeal made by Eastern art and the right way and mood for
looking at its creations.
\par Indian architecture especially demands this kind of inner study and this
spiritual self-identification with its deepest meaning and will not otherwise
reveal itself to us. The secular buildings of ancient India, her palaces and
places of assembly and civic edifices have not outlived the ravage of time;
what remains to us is mostly something of the great mountain and cave
temples, something too of the temples of her ancient cities of the plains, and
for the rest we have the fanes and shrines of her later times, whether
situated in temple cities and places of pilgrimage like Srirangam and
Rameshwaram or in her great once regal towns like Madura, when the
temple was the centre of life. It is then the most hieratic side of a hieratic art
that remains to us. These sacred buildings are the signs, the architectural
self-expression of an ancient spiritual and religious culture. Ignore the
spiritual suggestion, the religious significance, the meaning of the symbols and
indications, look only with the rational and secular aesthetic mind, and it is
vain to expect that we shall get to any true and discerning appreciation of this
art. And it has to be remembered too that the religious spirit here is
something
Page 272

quite different from the sense of European religions; and even mediaeval
Christianity, especially as now looked at by the modern European mind which
has gone through the two great crises of the Renascence and recent
secularism, will not in spite of its oriental origin and affinities be of much real
help. To bring in into the artistic look on an Indian temple occidental
memories or a comparison with Greek Parthenon or Italian church or Duomo
or Campanile or even the great Gothic cathedrals of mediaeval France,
though these have in them something much nearer to the Indian mentality, is
to intrude a fatally foreign and disturbing element or standard in the mind. But
this consciously or else subconsciously is what almost every European mind
does to a greater or less degree,—and it is here a pernicious immixture, for it
subjects the work of a vision that saw the immeasurable to the tests of an
eye that dwells only on measure.
\par Indian sacred architecture of whatever date, style or dedication goes
back to something timelessly ancient and now outside India almost wholly
lost, something which belongs to the past, and yet it goes forward too, though
this the rationalistic mind will not easily admit, to something which will return
upon us and is already beginning to return, something which belongs to the
future. An Indian temple, to whatever godhead it may be built, is in its inmost
reality an altar raised to the divine Self, a house of the Cosmic Spirit, an
appeal and aspiration to the Infinite. As that and in the light of that seeing and
conception it must in the first place be understood, and everything else must
be seen in that setting and that light, and then only can there be any real
understanding. No artistic eye however alert and sensible and no aesthetic
mind however full and sensitive can arrive at that understanding, if it is
attached to a Hellenised conception of rational beauty or shuts itself up in a
materialised or intellectual interpretation and fails to open itself to the great
things here meant by a kindred close response to some touch of the cosmic
consciousness, some revelation of the greater spiritual self, some suggestion
of the Infinite. These things, the spiritual self, the cosmic spirit, the Infinite,
are not rational, but suprarational, eternal presences, but to the intellect only
words, and visible, sensible,
Page 273

near only to an intuition and revelation in our inmost selves. An art which
starts from them as a first conception can only give us what it has to give,
their touch, their nearness, their self-disclosure, through some responding
intuition and revelation in us, in our own soul, our own self. It is this which
one must come to it to find and not demand from it the satisfaction of some
quite other seeking or some very different turn of imagination and more
limited superficial significance.
\par This is the first truth of Indian architecture and its significance which
demands emphasis and it leads at once to the answer to certain very common
misapprehensions and objections. All art reposes on some unity and all its
details, whether few and sparing or lavish and crowded and full, must go
back to that unity and help its significance; otherwise it is not art. Now we
find our Western critic telling us with an assurance which would be
stupefying if one did not see how naturally it arose, that in Indian architecture
there is no unity, which is as much as to say that there is here no great art at
all, but only a skill in the execution of crowded and unrelated details. We are
told even by otherwise sympathetic judges that there is an overloading of
ornament and detail which, however beautiful or splendid in itself, stands in
the way of unity, an attempt to load every rift with ore, an absence of calm,
no unfilled spaces, no relief to the eye. Mr. Archer as usual carries up the
adverse criticism to its extreme clamorous top notes; his heavily shotted
phrases are all a continuous insistence on this one theme. The great temples
of the South of India are, he allows, marvels of massive construction. He
seems by the way to have a rooted objection to massiveness in architecture
or great massed effects in sculpture, regardless of their appropriateness or
need, although he admits them in literature. Still this much there is and with it
a sort of titanic impressiveness, but of unity, clarity, nobility there is no trace.
This observation seems to my judgment sufficiently contradictory, since I do
not understand how there can be a marvel of construction, whether light or
massive, without any unity,—but here is not even, it seems, a trace of it—or
a mighty impressiveness without any greatness or nobility whatever, even
allowing this to be a Titanic and not
Page 274

an Olympian nobleness. He tells us that everything is ponderous, everything
here overwrought and the most prominent features swarming, writhing with
contorted semi-human figures are as senseless as anything in architecture.
How, one might ask, does he know that they are senseless, when he
practically admits that he has made no attempt to find what is their sense, but
has simply assumed from the self-satisfied sufficiency of his own admitted
ignorance and failure to understand that there cannot be any meaning? And
the whole thing he characterises as a monstrosity built by Rakshasas, ogres,
demons, a gigantesque barbarism. The northern buildings find a little less
disfavour in his eyes, but the difference in the end is small or none. There is
the same ponderousness, absence of lightness and grace, an even greater
profusion of incised ornament; these too are barbaric creations. Alone the
Mahomedan architecture, called Indo-Saracenic, is exempted from this
otherwise universal condemnation.
\par It is a little surprising after all, however natural the first blindness here,
that even assailants of this extreme kind, since they must certainly know that
there can be no art, no effective construction without unity, should not have
paused even once to ask themselves whether after all there must not be here
some principle of oneness which they had missed because they came with
alien conceptions and looked at things from the wrong end, and before
pronouncing this magisterial judgment should not have had patience to wait in
a more detached and receptive way upon the thing under their eye and seen
whether then some secret of unity did not emerge. But it is the more
sympathetic and less violent critic who deserves a direct answer. Now it may
readily be admitted that the failure to see at once the unity of this architecture
is perfectly natural to a European eye, because unity in the sense demanded
by the Western conception, the Greek unity gained by much suppression and
a sparing use of detail and circumstance or even the Gothic unity got by
casting everything into the mould of a single spiritual aspiration, is not there.
And the greater unity that really is there can never be arrived at at all, if the
eye begins and ends by dwelling on form and detail and ornament, because it
will then be obsessed by
Page 275

these things and find it difficult to go beyond to the unity which all this in its
totality serves not so much to express in itself, but to fill it with that which
comes out of it and relieve its oneness by multitude. An original oneness, not
a combined or synthetic or an effected unity, is that from which this art
begins and to which its work when finished returns or rather lives in it as in
its self and natural atmosphere. Indian sacred architecture constantly
represents the greatest oneness of the self, the cosmic, the infinite in the
immensity of its world-design, the multitude of its features of self-expression,
\s{lak\,sa\,na}, (yet the oneness is greater than and independent of their totality
and in itself indefinable), and all its starting-point of unity in conception, its
mass of design and immensity of material, its crowding abundance of
significant ornament and detail and its return towards oneness are only
intelligible as necessary circumstances of this poem, this epic or this
lyric—for there are smaller structures which are such lyrics—of the Infinite.
The Western mentality, except in those who are coming or returning, since
Europe had once something of this cult in her own way, to this vision, may
find it difficult to appreciate the truth and meaning of such an art, which tries
to figure existence as a whole and not in its pieces; but I would invite those
Indian minds who are troubled by these criticisms or partly or temporarily
overpowered by the Western way of seeing things, to look at our architecture
in the light of this conception and see whether all but minor objections do not
vanish as soon as the real meaning makes itself felt and gives body to the
first indefinable impression and emotion which we experience before the
greater constructions of the Indian builders.
\par To appreciate this spiritual-aesthetic truth of Indian architecture, it will
be best to look first at some work where there is not the complication of
surroundings now often out of harmony with the building, outside even those
temple towns which still retain their dependence on the sacred motive, and
rather in some place where there is room for a free background of Nature. I
have before me two prints which can well serve the purpose, a temple at
Kalahasti, a temple at Sinhachalam, two buildings entirely different in
treatment and yet one in the ground and
Page 276

the universal motive. The straight way here is not to detach the temple from
its surroundings, but to see it in unity with the sky and low-lying landscape or
with the sky and hills around and feel the thing common to both, the
construction and its environment, the reality in Nature, the reality expressed
in the work of art. The oneness to which this Nature aspires in her
inconscient self-creation and in which she lives, the oneness to which the soul
of man uplifts itself in his conscious spiritual upbuilding, his labour of
aspiration here expressed in stone, and in which so upbuilt he and his work
live, are the same and the soul-motive is one. Thus seen this work of man
seems to be something which has started out and detached itself against the
power of the natural world, something of the one common aspiration in both
to the same infinite spirit of itself,—the inconscient uplook and against it the
strong single relief of the self-conscient effort and success of finding. One of
these buildings climbs up bold, massive in projection, up-piled in the greatness
of a forceful but sure ascent, preserving its range and line to the last, the
other soars from the strength of its base, in the grace and emotion of a
curving mass to a rounded summit and crowning symbol. There is in both a
constant, subtle yet pronounced lessening from the base towards the top, but
at each stage a repetition of the same form, the same multiplicity of
insistence, the same crowded fullness and indented relief, but one maintains
its multiple endeavour and indication to the last, the other ends in a single
sign. To find the significance we have first to feel the oneness of the infinity
in which this nature and this art live, then see this thronged expression as the
sign of the infinite multiplicity which fills this oneness, see in the regular
lessening ascent of the edifice the subtler and subtler return from the base on
earth to the original unity and seize on the symbolic indication of its close at
the top. Not absence of unity, but a tremendous unity is revealed. Reinterpret
intimately what this representation means in the terms of our own spiritual
self-existence and cosmic being, and we have what these great builders saw
in themselves and reared in stone. All objections, once we have got at this
identity in spiritual experience, fall away and show themselves to be what
Page 277

they really are, the utterance and cavil of an impotent misunderstanding, an
insufficient apprehension or a complete failure to see. To appreciate the
detail of Indian architecture is easy when the whole is thus seen and known;
otherwise, it is impossible.
\par This method of interpretation applies, however different the construction
and the nature of the rendering, to all Dravidian architecture, not only to the
mighty temples of far-spread fame, but to unknown roadside shrines in small
towns, which are only a slighter execution of the same theme, a satisfied
suggestion here, but the greater buildings a grandiose fulfilled aspiration. The
architectural language of the north is of a different kind, there is another
basic style; but here too the same spiritual, meditative, intuitive method has to
be used and we get at the same result, an aesthetic interpretation or
suggestion of the one spiritual experience, one in all its complexity and
diversity, which founds the unity of the infinite variations of Indian spirituality
and religious feeling and the realised union of the human self with the Divine.
This is the unity too of all the creations of this hieratic art. The different
styles and motives arrive at or express that unity in different ways. The
objection that an excess of thronging detail and ornament hides, impairs or
breaks up the unity, is advanced only because the eye has made the mistake
of dwelling on the detail first without relation to this original spiritual oneness,
which has first to be fixed in an intimate spiritual seeing and union and then
all else seen in that vision and experience. When we look on the multiplicity
of the world, it is only a crowded plurality that we can find and to arrive at
unity we have to reduce, to suppress what we have seen or sparingly select a
few indications or to be satisfied with the unity of this or that separate idea,
experience or imagination; but when we have realised the self, the infinite
unity and look back on the multiplicity of the world, then we find that oneness
able to bear all the infinity of variation and circumstance we can crowd into it
and its unity remains unabridged by even the most endless self-multiplication
of its informing creation. We find the same thing in looking at this
architecture. The wealth of ornament, detail, circumstance in Indian temples
represents the infinite variety and
Page 278

repetition of the worlds,—not our world only, but all the planes,—suggests the
infinite multiplicity in the infinite oneness. It is a matter of our own experience
and fullness of vision how much we leave out or bring in, whether we
express so much or so little or attempt as in the Dravidian style to give the
impression of a teeming inexhaustible plenitude. The largeness of this unity is
base and continent enough for any superstructure or content of multitude.
\par To condemn this abundance as barbarous is to apply a foreign standard.
Where after all are we bound to draw the line? To the pure classical taste
Shakespeare's art once appeared great but barbarous for a similar
reason,—one remembers the Gallic description of him as a drunken barbarian
of genius,—his artistic unity non-existent or spoilt by crowding tropical
vegetation of incident and character, his teeming imaginations violent,
exaggerated, sometimes bizarre, monstrous, without symmetry, proportion
and all the other lucid unities, lightnesses, graces loved by the classic mind.
That mind might say of his work in language like Mr. Archer's that here there
is indeed a Titanic genius, a mass of power, but of unity, clarity, classic
nobility no trace, but rather an entire absence of lucid grace and lightness and
restraint, a profusion of wild ornament and an imaginative riot without law or
measure, strained figures, distorted positions and gestures, no dignity, no fine,
just, rationally natural and beautiful classic movement and pose. But even the
strictest Latin mind has now got over its objections to the “splendid
barbarism” of Shakespeare and can understand that here is a fuller, less
sparing and exiguous vision of life, a greater intuitive unity than the formal
unities of the classic aesthesis. But the Indian vision of the world and
existence was vaster and fuller than Shakespeare's, because it embraced not
merely life, but all being, not merely humanity, but all the worlds and all
Nature and cosmos. The European mind not having arrived except in
individuals at any close, direct, insistent realisation of the unity of the infinite
self or the cosmic consciousness peopled with its infinite multiplicity, is not
driven to express these things, cannot understand or put up with them when
they are expressed in this
Page 279

oriental art, speech and style and object to it as the Latin mind once objected
to Shakespeare. Perhaps the day is not distant when it will see and
understand and perhaps even itself try to express the same things in another
language.
\par The objection that the crowding detail allows no calm, gives no relief or
space to the eye, falls under the same heading, springs from the same root, is
urged from a different experience and has no validity for the Indian
experience. For this unity on which all is upborne, carries in itself the infinite
space and calm of the spiritual realisation, and there is no need for other
unfilled spaces or tracts of calm of a lesser more superficial kind. The eye is
here only a way of access to the soul, it is to that that there is the appeal, and
if the soul living in this realisation or dwelling under the influence of this
aesthetic impression needs any relief, it is not from the incidence of life and
form, but from the immense incidence of that vastness of infinity and tranquil
silence, and that can only be given by its opposite, by an abundance of form
and detail and life. As for the objection in regard to Dravidian architecture to
its massiveness and its Titanic construction, the precise spiritual effect
intended could not be given otherwise; for the infinite, the cosmic seen as a
whole in its vast manifestation is Titanic, is mighty in material and power. It is
other and quite different things also, but none of these are absent from Indian
construction. The great temples of the north have often in spite of Mr.
Archer's dictum, a singular grace in their power, a luminous lightness
relieving their mass and strength, a rich delicacy of beauty in their ornate
fullness. It is not indeed the Greek lightness, clarity or naked nobleness, nor is
it exclusive, but comes in in a fine blending of opposites which is in the very
spirit of the Indian religious, philosophical and aesthetic mind. Nor are these
things absent from many Dravidian buildings, though in certain styles they are
boldly sacrificed or only put into minor incidents,—one instance of the kind
Mr. Archer rejoices in as an oasis in the desert of this to him unintelligible
mass of might and greatness,—but in either case suppressed so that the
fullness of solemn and grandiose effect may have a complete, an
undiminished expression.
Page 280

\par I need not deal with adverse strictures of a more insignificant
kind,—such as the dislike of the Indian form of the arch and dome, because
they are not the radiating arch and dome of other styles. That is only an
intolerant refusal to admit the beauty of unaccustomed forms. It is legitimate
to prefer one's own things, those to which our mind and nature have been
trained, but to condemn other art and effort because it also prefers its own
way of arriving at beauty, greatness, self-expression, is a narrowness which
with the growth of a more catholic culture ought to disappear. But there is
one comment on Dravidian temple architecture which is worth noting
because it is made by others than Mr. Archer and his kind. Even a
sympathetic mind like Professor Geddes is impressed by some sense of a
monstrous effect of terror and gloom in these mighty buildings. Such
expressions are astonishing to an Indian mind because terror and gloom are
conspicuously absent from the feelings aroused in it by its religion, art or
literature. In the religion they are rarely awakened and only in order to be
immediately healed and, even when they come, are always sustained by the
sense of a supporting and helping presence, an eternal greatness and calm or
love or Delight behind; the very goddess of destruction is at the same time
the compassionate and loving Mother; the austere Maheshwara, Rudra, is
also Shiva, the auspicious, Ashutosha, the refuge of men. The Indian thinking
and religious mind looks with calm, without shrinking or repulsion, with an
understanding born of its agelong effort at identity and oneness, at all that
meets it in the stupendous spectacle of the cosmos. And even its asceticism,
its turning from the world, which begins not in terror and gloom, but in a
sense of vanity and fatigue, or of something higher, truer, happier than life,
soon passes beyond any element of pessimistic sadness into the rapture of
the eternal peace and bliss. Indian secular poetry and drama is throughout
rich, vital and joyous and there is more tragedy, terror, sorrow and gloom
packed into any few pages of European work than we can find in the whole
mass of Indian literature. It does not seem to me that Indian art is at all
different in this respect from the religion and literature. The Western mind is
here thrusting in its own habitual reactions
Page 281

upon things in the indigenous conception in which they have no proper place.
Mark the curious misreading of the dance of Shiva as a dance of Death or
Destruction, whereas, as anybody ought to be able to see who looks upon the
Nataraja, it expresses on the contrary the rapture of the cosmic dance with
the profundities behind of the unmoved eternal and infinite bliss. So too the
figure of Kali which is so terrible to European eyes is, as we know, the
Mother of the universe accepting this fierce aspect of destruction in order to
slay the Asuras, the powers of evil in man and the world. There are other
strands in this feeling in the Western mind which seem to spring from a
dislike of anything uplifted far beyond the human measure and others again in
which we see a subtle survival of the Greek limitation, the fear, gloom and
aversion with which the sunny terrestrial Hellenic mind commonly met the
idea of the beyond, the limitless, the unknown; but that reaction has no place
in Indian mentality. And as for the strangeness or formidable aspect of
certain unhuman figures or the conception of demons or Rakshasas, it must
be remembered that the Indian aesthetic mind deals not only with the earth
but with psychic planes in which these things exist and ranges freely among
them without being overpowered because it carries everywhere the stamp of
a large confidence in the strength and the omnipresence of the Self or the
Divine.
\par I have dwelt on Hindu and especially on Dravidian architecture because
the latter is the most fiercely attacked as the most uncompromisingly foreign
to European taste. But a word too may be said about Indo-Moslem
architecture. I am not concerned to defend any claim for the purely
indigenous origin of its features. It seems to me that here the Indian mind has
taken in much from the Arab and Persian imagination and in certain mosques
and tombs I seem to find an impress of the robust and bold Afghan and
Mogul temperament; but it remains clear enough that it is still on the whole a
typically Indian creation with the peculiar Indian gift. The richness of
decorative skill and imagination has been turned to the uses of another style,
but it is the same skill which we find in the northern Hindu temples, and in the
ground we see, however toned down, something sometimes
Page 282

of the old epic mass and power, but more often that lyric grace which we see
developing before the Mahomedan advent in the indigenous sculpture,—as in
the schools of the North-East and of Java,—and sometimes a blending of the
two motives. The modification, the toning down sets the average European
mind at ease and secures its suffrage. But what is it that it so much admires?
Mr. Archer tells us at first that it is its rational beauty, refinement and grace,
normal, fair, refreshing after the monstrous riot of Hindu Yogic hallucination
and nightmare. That description which might have been written of Greek art,
seems to me grotesquely inapplicable. Immediately afterwards he harps on
quite another and an incompatible phrase, and calls it a fairy-land of exquisite
architecture. A rational fairy-land is a wonder which may perhaps be
hereafter discovered by some strange intertwining of the nineteenth and
twentieth century minds, but I do not think it has yet existed on earth or in the
heavens. Not rational but magical beauty satisfying and enchanting to some
deeper quite suprarational aesthetic soul in us is the inexpressible charm of
these creations. But still where does the magic touch our critic? He tells us in
a rapt journalistic style. It is the exquisite marble traceries, the beautiful
domes and minarets, the stately halls of sepulture, the marvellous loggias and
arcades, the magnificent plinths and platforms, the majestic gateways, et
cetera. And is this then all? Only the charm of an outward material luxury
and magnificence? Yes; Mr. Archer again tells us that we must be content
here with a visual sensuous beauty without any moral suggestion. And that
helps him to bring in the sentence of destructive condemnation without which
he could not feel happy in dealing with Indian things: this Moslem architecture
suggests not only unbridled luxury, but effeminacy and decadence! But in that
case, whatever its beauty, it belongs entirely to a secondary plane of artistic
creation and cannot rank with the great spiritual aspirations in stone of the
Hindu builders.
\par I do not demand “moral suggestions” from architecture, but is it true that
there is nothing but a sensuous outward grace and beauty and luxury in these
Indo-Moslem buildings? It is not at
Page 283

all true of the characteristic greater work. The Taj is not merely a sensuous
reminiscence of an imperial amour or a fairy enchantment hewn from the
moon's lucent quarries, but the eternal dream of a love that survives death.
The great mosques embody often a religious aspiration lifted to a noble
austerity which supports and is not lessened by the subordinated ornament
and grace. The tombs reach beyond death to the beauty and joy of Paradise.
The buildings of Fatehpur-Sikri are not monuments of an effeminate luxurious
decadence,—an absurd description for the mind of the time of Akbar,—but
give form to a nobility, power and beauty which lay hold upon but do not
wallow on the earth. There is not here indeed the vast spiritual content of the
earlier Indian mind, but it is still an Indian mind which in these delicate
creations absorbs the West Asian influence, and lays stress on the sensuous
as before in the poetry of Kalidasa, but uplifts it to a certain immaterial
charm, rises often from the earth without quite leaving it into the magical
beauty of the middle world and in the religious mood touches with a devout
hand the skirts of the Divine. The all-pervading spiritual obsession is not
there, but other elements of life not ignored by Indian culture and gaining on it
since the classical times are here brought out under a new influence and are
still penetrated with some radiant glow of a superior lustre.
Page 284

\par
\hn XIV
\par
\ht Indian Art–3
\par\drop The sculpture and painting of ancient India have recently been
rehabilitated with a surprising suddenness in the eyes of a more cultivated
European criticism in the course of that rapid opening of the Western mind to
the value of oriental thought and creation which is one of the most significant
signs of a change that is yet only in its beginning. There have even been here
and there minds of a fine perception and profound originality who have seen
in a return to the ancient and persistent freedom of oriental art, its refusal to
be shackled or debased by an imitative realism, its fidelity to the true theory
of art as an inspired interpretation of the deeper soul values of existence
lifted beyond servitude to the outsides of Nature, the right way to the
regeneration and liberation of the aesthetic and creative mind of Europe. And
actually, although much of Western art runs still along the old grooves, much
too of its most original recent creation has elements or a guiding direction
which brings it nearer to the Eastern mentality and understanding. It might
then be possible for us to leave it at that and wait for time to deepen this new
vision and vindicate more fully the truth and greatness of the art of India.
\par But we are concerned not only with the critical estimation of our art by
Europe, but much more nearly with the evil effect of the earlier depreciation
on the Indian mind which has been for a long time side-tracked off its true
road by a foreign, an anglicised education and, as a result, vulgarised and
falsified by the loss of its own true centre, because this hampers and retards
a sound and living revival of artistic taste and culture and stands in the way of
a new age of creation. It was only a few years ago that the mind of educated
India—“educated” without an atom of real culture—accepted contentedly
the vulgar English estimate of our sculpture and painting as undeveloped
inferior art or even
Page 285

a mass of monstrous and abortive miscreation, and though that has passed
and there is a great change, there is still very common a heavy weight of
secondhand occidental notions, a bluntness or absolute lacking of aesthetic
taste,
\note{For example, one still reads with a sense of despairing stupefaction
“criticism” that speaks of Ravi Varma and Abanindranath Tagore as artistic
creators of different styles, but an equal power and genius!} a failure to
appreciate, and one still comes sometimes across a strain of blatantly
anglicised criticism which depreciates all that is in the Indian manner and
praises only what is consistent with Western canons. And the old style of
European criticism continues to have some weight with us, because the lack
of aesthetic or indeed of any real cultural training in our present system of
education makes us ignorant and undiscriminating receptacles, so that we are
ready to take the considered opinions of competent critics like Okakura or
Mr. Laurence Binyon and the rash scribblings of journalists of the type of
Mr. Archer, who write without authority because in these things they have
neither taste nor knowledge, as of equal importance and the latter even
attract a greater attention. It is still necessary therefore to reiterate things
which, however obvious to a trained or sensitive aesthetic intelligence, are not
yet familiar to the average mind still untutored or habituated to a system of
false weights and values. The work of recovering a true and inward
understanding of ourselves—our past and our present self and from that our
future—is only in its commencement for the majority of our people.
\par To appreciate our own artistic past at its right value we have to free
ourselves from all subjection to a foreign outlook and see our sculpture and
painting, as I have already suggested about our architecture, in the light of its
own profound intention and greatness of spirit. When we so look at it, we
shall be able to see that the sculpture of ancient and mediaeval India claims
its place on the very highest levels of artistic achievement. I do not know
where we shall find a sculptural art of a more profound intention, a greater
spirit, a more consistent skill of achievement. Inferior work there is, work that
fails or succeeds
Page 286

only partially, but take it in its whole, in the long persistence of its excellence,
in the number of its masterpieces, in the power with which it renders the soul
and the mind of a people, and we shall be tempted to go further and claim for
it a first place. The art of sculpture has indeed flourished supremely only in
ancient countries where it was conceived against its natural background and
support, a great architecture. Egypt, Greece, India take the premier rank in
this kind of creation. Mediaeval and modern Europe produced nothing of the
same mastery, abundance and amplitude, while on the contrary in painting
later Europe has done much and richly and with a prolonged and constantly
renewed inspiration. The difference arises from the different kind of
mentality required by the two arts. The material in which we work makes its
own peculiar demand on the creative spirit, lays down its own natural
conditions, as Ruskin has pointed out in a different connection, and the art of
making in stone or bronze calls for a cast of mind which the ancients had and
the moderns have not or have had only in rare individuals, an artistic mind not
too rapidly mobile and self-indulgent, not too much mastered by its own
personality and emotion and the touches that excite and pass, but founded
rather on some great basis of assured thought and vision, stable in
temperament, fixed in its imagination on things that are firm and enduring.
One cannot trifle with ease in these sterner materials, one cannot even for
long or with safety indulge in them in mere grace and external beauty or the
more superficial, mobile and lightly attractive motives. The aesthetic
self-indulgence which the soul of colour permits and even invites, the
attraction of the mobile play of life to which line of brush, pen or pencil gives
latitude, are here forbidden or, if to some extent achieved, only within a line
of restraint to cross which is perilous and soon fatal. Here grand or profound
motives are called for, a more or less penetrating spiritual vision or some
sense of things eternal to base the creation. The sculptural art is static,
self-contained, necessarily firm, noble or severe and demands an aesthetic
spirit capable of these qualities. A certain mobility of life and mastering grace
of line can come in upon this basis, but if it entirely replaces the original
dharma of the
Page 287

material, that means that the spirit of the statuette has come into the statue
and we may be sure of an approaching decadence. Hellenic sculpture
following this line passed from the greatness of Phidias through the soft
self-indulgence of Praxiteles to its decline. A later Europe has failed for the
most part in sculpture, in spite of some great work by individuals, an Angelo
or a Rodin, because it played externally with stone and bronze, took them as
a medium for the representation of life and could not find a sufficient basis of
profound vision or spiritual motive. In Egypt and in India, on the contrary,
sculpture preserved its power of successful creation through several great
ages. The earliest recently discovered work in India dates back to the fifth
century \BC B.C. and is already fully evolved with an evident history of
consummate previous creation behind it, and the latest work of some high
value comes down to within a few centuries from our own time. An assured
history of two millenniums of accomplished sculptural creation is a rare and
significant fact in the life of a people.
\par This greatness and continuity of Indian sculpture is due to the close
connection between the religious and philosophical and the aesthetic mind of
the people. Its survival into times not far from us was possible because of the
survival of the cast of the antique mind in that philosophy and religion, a mind
familiar with eternal things, capable of cosmic vision, having its roots of
thought and seeing in the profundities of the soul, in the most intimate,
pregnant and abiding experiences of the human spirit. The spirit of this
greatness is indeed at the opposite pole to the perfection within limits, the
lucid nobility or the vital fineness and physical grace of Hellenic creation in
stone. And since the favourite trick of Mr. Archer and his kind is to throw
the Hellenic ideal constantly in our face, as if sculpture must be either
governed by the Greek standard or worthless, it is as well to take note of the
meaning of the difference. The earlier and more archaic Greek style had
indeed something in it which looks like a reminiscent touch of a first creative
origin from Egypt and the Orient, but there is already there the governing
conception which determined the Greek aesthesis and has dominated the
Page 288

later mind of Europe, the will to combine some kind of expression of an inner
truth with an idealising imitation of external Nature. The brilliance, beauty and
nobility of the work which was accomplished, was a very great and perfect
thing, but it is idle to maintain that that is the sole possible method or the one
permanent and natural law of artistic creation. Its highest greatness subsisted
only so long—and it was not for very long—as a certain satisfying balance
was struck and constantly maintained between a fine, but not very subtle,
opulent or profound spiritual suggestion and an outward physical harmony of
nobility and grace. A later work achieved a brief miracle of vital suggestion
and sensuous physical grace with a certain power of expressing the spirit of
beauty in the mould of the senses; but this once done, there was no more to
see or create. For the curious turn which impels at the present day the
modern mind to return to spiritual vision through a fiction of exaggerated
realism which is really a pressure upon the form of things to yield the secret
of the spirit in life and matter, was not open to the classic temperament and
intelligence. And it is surely time for us to see, as is now by many admitted,
that an acknowledgment of the greatness of Greek art in its own province
ought not to prevent the plain perception of the rather strait and narrow
bounds of that province. What Greek sculpture expressed was fine, gracious
and noble, but what it did not express and could not by the limitations of its
canon hope to attempt, was considerable, was immense in possibility, was
that spiritual depth and extension which the human mind needs for its larger
and deeper self-experience. And just this is the greatness of Indian sculpture
that it expresses in stone and bronze what the Greek aesthetic mind could not
conceive or express and embodies it with a profound understanding of its
right conditions and a native perfection.
\par The more ancient sculptural art of India embodies in visible form what
the Upanishads threw out into inspired thought and the Mahabharata and
Ramayana portrayed by the word in life. This sculpture like the architecture
springs from spiritual realisation, and what it creates and expresses at its
greatest is the spirit in form, the soul in body, this or that living soul power
Page 289

in the divine or the human, the universal and cosmic individualised in
suggestion but not lost in individuality, the impersonal supporting a not too
insistent play of personality, the abiding moments of the eternal, the presence,
the idea, the power, the calm or potent delight of the spirit in its actions and
creations. And over all the art something of this intention broods and persists
and is suggested even where it does not dominate the mind of the sculptor.
And therefore as in the architecture so in the sculpture, we have to bring a
different mind to this work, a different capacity of vision and response, we
have to go deeper into ourselves to see than in the more outwardly
imaginative art of Europe. The Olympian gods of Phidias are magnified and
uplifted human beings saved from a too human limitation by a certain divine
calm of impersonality or universalised quality, divine type, guna; in other work
we see heroes, athletes, feminine incarnations of beauty, calm and restrained
embodiments of idea, action or emotion in the idealised beauty of the human
figure. The gods of Indian sculpture are cosmic beings, embodiments of some
great spiritual power, spiritual idea and action, inmost psychic significance,
the human form a vehicle of this soul meaning, its outward means of
self-expression; everything in the figure, every opportunity it gives, the face,
the hands, the posture of the limbs, the poise and turn of the body, every
accessory, has to be made instinct with the inner meaning, help it to emerge,
carry out the rhythm of the total suggestion, and on the other hand everything
is suppressed which would defeat this end, especially all that would mean an
insistence on the merely vital or physical, outward or obvious suggestions of
the human figure. Not the ideal physical or emotional beauty, but the utmost
spiritual beauty or significance of which the human form is capable, is the aim
of this kind of creation. The divine self in us is its theme, the body made a
form of the soul is its idea and its secret. And therefore in front of this art it is
not enough to look at it and respond with the aesthetic eye and the
imagination, but we must look also into the form for what it carries and even
through and behind it to pursue the profound suggestion it gives into its own
infinite. The religious
Page 290

or hieratic side of Indian sculpture is intimately connected with the spiritual
experiences of Indian meditation and adoration,—those deep things of our
self-discovery which our critic calls contemptuously Yogic
hallucinations,—soul realisation is its method of creation and soul realisation
must be the way of our response and understanding. And even with the
figures of human beings or groups it is still a like inner aim and vision which
governs the labour of the sculptor. The statue of a king or a saint is not meant
merely to give the idea of a king or saint or to portray some dramatic action
or to be a character portrait in stone, but to embody rather a soul state or
experience or deeper soul quality, as for instance, not the outward emotion,
but the inner soul-side of rapt ecstasy of adoration and God-vision in the saint
or the devotee before the presence of the worshipped deity. This is the
character of the task the Indian sculptor set before his effort and it is
according to his success in that and not by the absence of something else,
some quality or some intention foreign to his mind and contrary to his design,
that we have to judge of his achievement and his labour.
\par Once we admit this standard, it is impossible to speak too highly of the
profound intelligence of its conditions which was developed in Indian
sculpture, of the skill with which its task was treated or of the consummate
grandeur and beauty of its masterpieces. Take the great Buddhas—not the
Gandharan, but the divine figures or groups in cave cathedral or temple, the
best of the later southern bronzes of which there is a remarkable collection of
plates in Mr. Gangoly's book on that subject, the Kalasanhara image, the
Natarajas. No greater or finer work, whether in conception or execution, has
been done by the human hand and its greatness is increased by obeying a
spiritualised aesthetic vision. The figure of the Buddha achieves the
expression of the infinite in a finite image, and that is surely no mean or
barbaric achievement, to embody the illimitable calm of Nirvana in a human
form and visage. The Kalasanhara Shiva is supreme not only by the majesty,
power, calmly forceful control, dignity and kingship of existence which the
whole spirit and pose of the figure visibly incarnates,—that is only half or less
than half
Page 291

its achievement,—but much more by the concentrated divine passion of the
spiritual overcoming of time and existence which the artist has succeeded in
putting into eye and brow and mouth and every feature and has subtly
supported by the contained suggestion, not emotional, but spiritual, of every
part of the body of the godhead and the rhythm of his meaning which he has
poured through the whole unity of this creation. Or what of the marvellous
genius and skill in the treatment of the cosmic movement and delight of the
dance of Shiva, the success with which the posture of every limb is made to
bring out the rhythm of the significance, the rapturous intensity and abandon
of the movement itself and yet the just restraint in the intensity of motion, the
subtle variation of each element of the single theme in the seizing idea of
these master sculptors? Image after image in the great temples or saved
from the wreck of time shows the same grand traditional art and the genius
which worked in that tradition and its many styles, the profound and firmly
grasped spiritual idea, the consistent expression of it in every curve, line and
mass, in hand and limb, in suggestive pose, in expressive rhythm,—it is an art
which, understood in its own spirit, need fear no comparison with any other,
ancient or modern, Hellenic or Egyptian, of the near or the far East or of the
West in any of its creative ages. This sculpture passed through many
changes, a more ancient art of extraordinary grandeur and epic power
uplifted by the same spirit as reigned in the Vedic and Vedantic seers and in
the epic poets, a later Puranic turn towards grace and beauty and rapture and
an outburst of lyric ecstasy and movement, and last a rapid and vacant
decadence; but throughout all the second period too the depth and greatness
of sculptural motive supports and vivifies the work and in the very turn
towards decadence something of it often remains to redeem from complete
debasement, emptiness or insignificance.
\par Let us see then what is the value of the objections made to the spirit and
style of Indian sculpture. This is the burden of the objurgations of the devil's
advocate that his self-bound European mind finds the whole thing barbaric,
meaningless, uncouth, strange, bizarre, the work of a distorted imagination
Page 292

labouring mid a nightmare of unlovely unrealities. Now there is in the total of
what survives to us work that is less inspired or even work that is bad,
exaggerated, forced or clumsy, the production of mechanic artificers mingled
with the creation of great nameless artists, and an eye that does not
understand the sense, the first conditions of the work, the mind of the race or
its type of aesthesis, may well fail to distinguish between good and inferior
execution, decadent work and the work of the great hands and the great
eras. But applied as a general description the criticism is itself grotesque and
distorted and it means only that here are conceptions and a figuring
imagination strange to the Western intelligence. The line and run and turn
demanded by the Indian aesthetic sense are not the same as those demanded
by the European. It would take too long to examine the detail of the
difference which we find not only in sculpture, but in the other plastic arts
and in music and even to a certain extent in literature, but on the whole we
may say that the Indian mind moves on the spur of a spiritual sensitiveness
and psychic curiosity, while the aesthetic curiosity of the European
temperament is intellectual, vital, emotional and imaginative in that sense, and
almost the whole strangeness of the Indian use of line and mass, ornament
and proportion and rhythm arises from this difference. The two minds live
almost in different worlds, are either not looking at the same things or, even
where they meet in the object, see it from a different level or surrounded by a
different atmosphere, and we know what power the point of view or the
medium of vision has to transform the object. And undoubtedly there is very
ample ground for Mr. Archer's complaint of the want of naturalism in most
Indian sculpture. The inspiration, the way of seeing is frankly not naturalistic,
not, that is to say, the vivid, convincing and accurate, the graceful, beautiful or
strong, or even the idealised or imaginative imitation of surface or terrestrial
nature. The Indian sculptor is concerned with embodying spiritual
experiences and impressions, not with recording or glorifying what is received
by the physical senses. He may start with suggestions from earthly and
physical things, but he produces his work only after he has closed his eyes to
the
Page 293

insistence of the physical circumstances, seen them in the psychic memory
and transformed them within himself so as to bring out something other than
their physical reality or their vital and intellectual significance. His eye sees
the psychic line and turn of things and he replaces by them the material
contours. It is not surprising that such a method should produce results which
are strange to the average Western mind and eye when these are not
liberated by a broad and sympathetic culture. And what is strange to us, is
naturally repugnant to our habitual mind and uncouth to our habitual sense,
bizarre to our imaginative tradition and aesthetic training. We want what is
familiar to the eye and obvious to the imagination and will not readily admit
that there may be here another and perhaps greater beauty than that in the
circle of which we are accustomed to live and take pleasure.
\par It seems to be especially the application of this psychic vision to the
human form which offends these critics of Indian sculpture. There is the
familiar objection to such features as the multiplication of the arms in the
figures of gods and goddesses, the four, six, eight or ten arms of Shiva, the
eighteen arms of Durga, because they are a monstrosity, a thing not in
nature. Now certainly a play of imagination of this kind would be out of place
in the representation of a man or woman, because it would have no artistic or
other meaning, but I cannot see why this freedom should be denied in the
representation of cosmic beings like the Indian godheads. The whole question
is, first, whether it is an appropriate means of conveying a significance not
otherwise to be represented with an equal power and force and, secondly,
whether it is capable of artistic representation, a rhythm of artistic truth and
unity which need not be that of physical nature. If not, then it is an ugliness
and violence, but if these conditions are satisfied, the means are justified and
I do not see that we have any right, faced with the perfection of the work, to
raise a discordant clamour. Mr. Archer himself is struck with the perfection
of skill and mastery with which these to him superfluous limbs are disposed in
the figures of the dancing Shiva, and indeed it would need an eye of
impossible blindness
Page 294

not to see that much, but what is still more important is the artistic
significance which this skill is used to serve, and, if that is understood, we can
at once see that the spiritual emotion and suggestions of the cosmic dance
are brought out by this device in a way which would not be as possible with a
two-armed figure. The same truth holds as to the Durga with her eighteen
arms slaying the Asuras or the Shivas of the great Pallava creations where
the lyrical beauty of the Natarajas is absent, but there is instead a great epical
rhythm and grandeur. Art justifies its own means and here it does it with a
supreme perfection. And as for the “contorted” postures of some figures, the
same law holds. There is often a departure in this respect from the
anatomical norm of the physical body or else—and that is a rather different
thing—an emphasis more or less pronounced on an unusual pose of limbs or
body, and the question then is whether it is done without sense or purpose, a
mere clumsiness or an ugly exaggeration, or whether it rather serves some
significance and establishes in the place of the normal physical metric of
Nature another purposeful and successful artistic rhythm. Art after all is not
forbidden to deal with the unusual or to alter and overpass Nature, and it
might almost be said that it has been doing little else since it began to serve
the human imagination from its first grand epic exaggerations to the violences
of modern romanticism and realism, from the high ages of Valmiki and
Homer to the day of Hugo and Ibsen. The means matter, but less than the
significance and the thing done and the power and beauty with which it
expresses the dreams and truths of the human spirit.
\par The whole question of the Indian artistic treatment of the human figure
has to be understood in the light of its aesthetic purpose. It works with a
certain intention and ideal, a general norm and standard which permits of a
good many variations and from which too there are appropriate departures.
The epithets with which Mr. Archer tries to damn its features are absurd,
captious, exaggerated, the forced phrases of a journalist trying to depreciate a
perfectly sensible, beautiful and aesthetic norm with which he does not
sympathise. There are other things here than a repetition of hawk faces,
wasp waists, thin legs and the rest of
Page 295

the ill-tempered caricature. He doubts Mr. Havell's suggestion that these old
Indian artists knew the anatomy of the body well enough, as Indian science
knew it, but chose to depart from it for their own purpose. It does not seem
to me to matter much, since art is not anatomy, nor an artistic masterpiece
necessarily a reproduction of physical fact or a lesson in natural science. I
see no reason to regret the absence of telling studies in muscles, torsos, etc.,
for I cannot regard these things as having in themselves any essential artistic
value. The one important point is that the Indian artist had a perfect idea of
proportion and rhythm and used them in certain styles with nobility and
power, in others like the Javan, the Gauda or the southern bronzes with that
or with a perfect grace added and often an intense and a lyrical sweetness.
The dignity and beauty of the human figure in the best Indian statues cannot
be excelled, but what was sought and what was achieved was not an
outward naturalistic, but a spiritual and a psychic beauty, and to achieve it the
sculptor suppressed, and was entirely right in suppressing, the obtrusive
material detail and aimed instead at purity of outline and fineness of feature.
And into that outline, into that purity and fineness he was able to work
whatever he chose, mass of force or delicacy of grace, a static dignity or a
mighty strength or a restrained violence of movement or whatever served or
helped his meaning. A divine and subtle body was his ideal; and to a taste and
imagination too blunt or realistic to conceive the truth and beauty of his idea,
the ideal itself may well be a stumbling-block, a thing of offence. But the
triumphs of art are not to be limited by the narrow prejudices of the natural
realistic man; that triumphs and endures which appeals to the best,
\s{s\=adhu-sammatam}, that is deepest and greatest which satisfies the
profoundest souls and the most sensitive psychic imaginations.
\par Each manner of art has its own ideals, traditions, agreed conventions; for
the ideas and forms of the creative spirit are many, though there is one
ultimate basis. The perspective, the psychic vision of the Chinese and
Japanese painters are not the same as those of European artists; but who can
ignore the beauty and the wonder of their work? I dare say Mr. Archer
would set
Page 296

a Constable or a Turner above the whole mass of Far Eastern work, as I
myself, if I had to make a choice, would take a Chinese or Japanese
landscape or other magic transmutation of Nature in preference to all others;
but these are matters of individual, national or continental temperament and
preference. The essence of the question lies in the rendering of the truth and
beauty seized by the spirit. Indian sculpture, Indian art in general follows its
own ideal and traditions and these are unique in their character and quality. It
is the expression great as a whole through many centuries and ages of
creation, supreme at its best, whether in rare early pre-Asokan, in Asokan or
later work of the first heroic age or in the magnificent statues of the
cave-cathedrals and Pallava and other southern temples or the noble,
accomplished or gracious imaginations of Bengal, Nepal and Java through the
after centuries or in the singular skill and delicacy of the bronze work of the
southern religions, a self-expression of the spirit and ideals of a great nation
and a great culture which stands apart in the cast of its mind and qualities
among the earth's peoples, famed for its spiritual achievement, its deep
philosophies and its religious spirit, its artistic taste, the richness of its poetic
imagination, and not inferior once in its dealings with life and its social
endeavour and political institutions. This sculpture is a singularly powerful, a
seizing and profound interpretation in stone and bronze of the inner soul of
that people. The nation, the culture failed for a time in life after a long
greatness, as others failed before it and others will yet fail that now flourish;
the creations of its mind have been arrested, this art like others has ceased or
fallen into decay, but the thing from which it rose, the spiritual fire within still
burns and in the renascence that is coming it may be that this great art too
will revive, not saddled with the grave limitations of modern Western work in
the kind, but vivified by the nobility of a new impulse and power of the
ancient spiritual motive. Let it recover, not limited by old forms, but
undeterred by the cavillings of an alien mind, the sense of the grandeur and
beauty and the inner significance of its past achievement; for in the continuity
of its spiritual endeavour lies its best hope for the future.
Page 297

\par
\hn XV
\par
\ht Indian Art–4
\par\drop The art of painting in ancient and later India, owing to the
comparative scantiness of its surviving creations, does not create quite so
great an impression as her architecture and sculpture and it has even been
supposed that this art flourished only at intervals, finally ceased for a period
of several centuries and was revived later on by the Moguls and by Hindu
artists who underwent the Mogul influence. This however is a hasty view
that does not outlast a more careful research and consideration of the
available evidence. It appears, on the contrary, that Indian culture was able to
arrive at a well developed and an understanding aesthetic use of colour and
line from very early times and, allowing for the successive fluctuations,
periods of decline and fresh outbursts of originality and vigour, which the
collective human mind undergoes in all countries, used this form of
self-expression very persistently through the long centuries of its growth and
greatness. And especially it is apparent now that there was a persistent
tradition, a fundamental spirit and turn of the aesthetic sense native to the
mind of India which links even the latest Rajput art to the earliest surviving
work still preserved at its highest summit of achievement in the rock-cut
retreats of Ajanta.
\par The materials of the art of painting are unfortunately more perishable
than those of any other of the greater means of creative aesthetic
self-expression and of the ancient masterpieces only a little survives, but that
little still indicates the immensity of the amount of work of which it is the
fading remnant. It is said that of the twenty-nine caves at Ajanta almost all
once bore signs of decoration by frescoes; only so long ago as forty years
sixteen still contained something of the original paintings, but now six alone
still bear their witness to the greatness of this ancient art, though rapidly
perishing and deprived of something of the
Page 298

original warmth and beauty and glory of colour. The rest of all that vivid
contemporaneous creation which must at one time have covered the whole
country in the temples and viharas and the houses of the cultured and the
courts and pleasure-houses of nobles and kings, has perished, and we have
only, more or less similar to the work at Ajanta, some crumbling fragments of
rich and profuse decoration in the caves of Bagh and a few paintings of
female figures in two rock-cut chambers at Sigiriya.
\note{Since then more paintings of high quality have been found in some
southern temples, akin in their spirit and style to the work at Ajanta.} These
remnants represent the work of some six or seven centuries, but they leave
gaps, and nothing now remains of any paintings earlier than the first century
of the Christian era, except some frescoes, spoilt by unskilful restoration,
from the first century before it, while after the seventh there is a blank which
might at first sight argue a total decline of the art, a cessation and
disappearance. But there are fortunately evidences which carry back the
tradition of the art at one end many centuries earlier and other remains more
recently discovered and of another kind outside India and in the Himalayan
countries carry it forward at the other end as late as the twelfth century and
help us to link it on to the later schools of Rajput painting. The history of the
self-expression of the Indian mind in painting covers a period of as much as
two millenniums of more or less intense artistic creation and stands on a par
in this respect with the architecture and sculpture.
\par The paintings that remain to us from ancient times are the work of
Buddhist painters, but the art itself in India was of pre-Buddhistic origin. The
Tibetan historian ascribes a remote antiquity to all the crafts, prior to the
Buddha, and this is a conclusion increasingly pointed to by a constant
accumulation of evidence. Already in the third century before the Christian
era we find the theory of the art well founded from previous times, the six
essential elements, \s{\,sa\,da\.nga}, recognised and enumerated, like the more or
less corresponding six Chinese canons which are first mentioned nearly a
thousand years later, and in a very
Page 299

ancient work on the art pointing back to pre-Buddhistic times a number of
careful and very well-defined rules and traditions are laid down which were
developed into an elaborate science of technique and traditional rule in the
later Shilpasutras. The frequent references in the ancient literature also are
of a character which would have been impossible without a widespread
practice and appreciation of the art by both men and women of the cultured
classes, and these allusions and incidents evidencing a moved delight in the
painted form and beauty of colour and the appeal both to the decorative
sense and to the aesthetic emotion occur not only in the later poetry of
Kalidasa, Bhavabhuti and other classical dramatists, but in the early popular
drama of Bhasa and earlier still in the epics and in the sacred books of the
Buddhists. The absence of any actual creations of this earlier art makes it
indeed impossible to say with absolute certainty what was its fundamental
character and intimate source of inspiration or whether it was religious and
hieratic or secular in its origin. The theory has been advanced rather too
positively that it was in the courts of kings that the art began and with a
purely secular motive and inspiration, and it is true that while the surviving
work of Buddhist artists is mainly religious in subject or at least links on
common scenes of life to Buddhist ceremony and legend, the references in
the epic and dramatic literature are usually to painting of a more purely
aesthetic character, personal, domestic or civic, portrait painting, the
representation of scenes and incidents in the lives of kings and other great
personalities or mural decoration of palaces and private or public buildings.
On the other hand, there are similar elements in Buddhist painting, as, for
example, the portraits of the queens of King Kashyapa at Sigiriya, the historic
representation of a Persian embassy or the landing of Vijaya in Ceylon. And
we may fairly assume that all along Indian painting both Buddhist and Hindu
covered much the same kind of ground as the later Rajput work in a more
ample fashion and with a more antique greatness of spirit and was in its
ensemble an interpretation of the whole religion, culture and life of the Indian
people. The one important and significant thing that emerges is the constant
Page 300

oneness and continuity of all Indian art in its essential spirit and tradition.
Thus the earlier work at Ajanta has been found to be akin to the earlier
sculptural work of the Buddhists, while the later paintings have a similar close
kinship to the sculptural reliefs at Java. And we find that the spirit and
tradition which reigns through all changes of style and manner at Ajanta, is
present too at Bagh and Sigiriya, in the Khotan frescoes, in the illuminations
of Buddhist manuscripts of a much later time and in spite of the change of
form and manner is still spiritually the same in the Rajput paintings. This unity
and continuity enable us to distinguish and arrive at a clear understanding of
what is the essential aim, inner turn and motive, spiritual method which
differentiate Indian painting first from occidental work and then from the
nearer and more kindred art of other countries of Asia.
\par The spirit and motive of Indian painting are in their centre of conception
and shaping force of sight identical with the inspiring vision of Indian
sculpture. All Indian art is a throwing out of a certain profound self-vision
formed by a going within to find out the secret significance of form and
appearance, a discovery of the subject in one's deeper self, the giving of
soul-form to that vision and a remoulding of the material and natural shape to
express the psychic truth of it with the greatest possible purity and power of
outline and the greatest possible concentrated rhythmic unity of significance
in all the parts of an indivisible artistic whole. Take whatever masterpiece of
Indian painting and we shall find these conditions aimed at and brought out
into a triumphant beauty of suggestion and execution. The only difference
from the other arts comes from the turn natural and inevitable to its own kind
of aesthesis, from the moved and indulgent dwelling on what one might call
the mobilities of the soul rather than on its static eternities, on the casting out
of self into the grace and movement of psychic and vital life (subject always
to the reserve and restraint necessary to all art) rather than on the holding
back of life in the stabilities of the self and its eternal qualities and principles,
guna and tattwa. This distinction is of the very essence of the difference
between the work given to the sculptor and the painter, a difference imposed
on them by the natural
Page 301

scope, turn, possibility of their instrument and medium. The sculptor must
express always in static form; the idea of the spirit is cut out for him in mass
and line, significant in the stability of its insistence, and he can lighten the
weight of this insistence but not get rid of it or away from it; for him eternity
seizes hold of time in its shapes and arrests it in the monumental spirit of
stone or bronze. The painter on the contrary lavishes his soul in colour and
there is a liquidity in the form, a fluent grace of subtlety in the line he uses
which imposes on him a more mobile and emotional way of self-expression.
The more he gives us of the colour and changing form and emotion of the life
of the soul, the more his work glows with beauty, masters the inner aesthetic
sense and opens it to the thing his art better gives us than any other, the
delight of the motion of the self out into a spiritually sensuous joy of beautiful
shapes and the coloured radiances of existence. Painting is naturally the most
sensuous of the arts, and the highest greatness open to the painter is to
spiritualise this sensuous appeal by making the most vivid outward beauty a
revelation of subtle spiritual emotion so that the soul and the sense are at
harmony in the deepest and finest richness of both and united in their satisfied
consonant expression of the inner significances of things and life. There is
less of the austerity of Tapasya in his way of working, a less severely
restrained expression of eternal things and of the fundamental truths behind
the forms of things, but there is in compensation a moved wealth of psychic
or warmth of vital suggestion, a lavish delight of the beauty of the play of the
eternal in the moments of time and there the artist arrests it for us and makes
moments of the life of the soul reflected in form of man or creature or
incident or scene or Nature full of a permanent and opulent significance to
our spiritual vision. The art of the painter justifies visually to the spirit the
search of the sense for delight by making it its own search for the pure
intensities of meaning of the universal beauty it has revealed or hidden in
creation; the indulgence of the eye's desire in perfection of form and colour
becomes an enlightenment of the inner being through the power of a certain
spiritually aesthetic Ananda.
Page 302

\par The Indian artist lived in the light of an inspiration which imposed this
greater aim on his art and his method sprang from its fountains and served it
to the exclusion of any more earthly sensuous or outwardly imaginative
aesthetic impulse. The six limbs of his art, the \s{\,sa\,da\.nga}, are common to all
work in line and colour: they are the necessary elements and in their elements
the great arts are the same everywhere; the distinction of forms,
\s{r\=upabheda}, proportion, arrangement of line and mass, design, harmony,
perspective, \s{pram\=a\,na}, the emotion or aesthetic feeling expressed by the
form, \s{bh\=ava}, the seeking for beauty and charm for the satisfaction of the
aesthetic spirit, \s{l\=ava\,nya}, truth of the form and its suggestion, \s{s\=ad\,r\'sya},
the turn, combination, harmony of colours, \s{var\,nik\=abha\.nga}, are the first
constituents to which every successful work of art reduces itself in analysis.
But it is the turn given to each of the constituents which makes all the
difference in the aim and effect of the technique and the source and
character of the inner vision guiding the creative hand in their combination
which makes all the difference in the spiritual value of the achievement, and
the unique character of Indian painting, the peculiar appeal of the art of
Ajanta springs from the remarkably inward, spiritual and psychic turn which
was given to the artistic conception and method by the pervading genius of
Indian culture. Indian painting no more than Indian architecture and sculpture
could escape from its absorbing motive, its transmuting atmosphere, the direct
or subtle obsession of the mind that has been subtly and strangely changed,
the eye that has been trained to see, not as others with only the external eye
but by a constant communing of the mental parts and the inner vision with the
self beyond mind and the spirit to which forms are only a transparent veil or a
slight index of its own greater splendour. The outward beauty and power, the
grandeur of drawing, the richness of colour, the aesthetic grace of this
painting is too obvious and insistent to be denied, the psychical appeal usually
carries something in it to which there is a response in every cultivated and
sensitive human mind and the departures from the outward physical norm are
less vehement and intense, less disdainful of the more external beauty and
Page 303

grace,—as is only right in the nature of this art,—than in the sculpture:
therefore we find it more easily appreciated up to a certain point by the
Western critical mind, and even when not well appreciated, it is exposed to
milder objections. There is not the same blank incomprehension or violence of
misunderstanding and repulsion. And yet we find at the same time that there
is something which seems to escape the appreciation or is only imperfectly
understood, and this something is precisely that profounder spiritual intention
of which the things the eye and aesthetic sense immediately seize are only
the intermediaries. This explains the remark often made about Indian work of
the less visibly potent and quieter kind that it lacks inspiration or imagination
or is a conventional art: the spirit is missed where it does not strongly impose
itself, and is not fully caught even where the power which is put into the
expression is too great and direct to allow of denial. Indian painting like Indian
architecture and sculpture appeals through the physical and psychical to
another spiritual vision from which the artist worked and it is only when this is
no less awakened in us than the aesthetic sense that it can be appreciated in
all the depth of its significance.
\par The orthodox Western artist works by a severely conscientious
reproduction of the forms of outward Nature; the external world is his model,
and he has to keep it before his eye and repress any tendency towards a
substantial departure from it or any motion to yield his first allegiance to a
subtler spirit. His imagination submits itself to physical Nature even when he
brings in conceptions which are more properly of another kingdom, the stress
of the physical world is always with him, and the Seer of the subtle, the
creator of mental forms, the inner Artist, the wide-eyed voyager in the vaster
psychical realms, is obliged to subdue his inspirations to the law of the Seer of
the outward, the spirit that has embodied itself in the creations of the
terrestrial life, the material universe. An idealised imaginative realism is as far
as he can ordinarily go in the method of his work when he would fill the
outward with the subtler inner seeing. And when, dissatisfied with this
confining law, he would break quite out of the circle, he is exposed to a
temptation to stray
Page 304

into intellectual or imaginative extravagances which violate the universal rule
of the right distinction of forms, \s{r\=upabheda}, and belong to the vision of
some intermediate world of sheer fantasia. His art has discovered the rule of
proportion, arrangement and perspective which preserves the illusion of
physical Nature and he relates his whole design to her design in a spirit of
conscientious obedience and faithful dependence. His imagination is a servant
or interpreter of her imaginations, he finds in the observation of her universal
law of beauty his secret of unity and harmony and his subjectivity tries to
discover itself in hers by a close dwelling on the objective shapes she has
given to her creative spirit. The farthest he has got in the direction of a more
intimately subjective spirit is an impressionism which still waits upon her
models but seeks to get at some first inward or original effect of them on the
inner sense, and through that he arrives at some more strongly psychical
rendering, but he does not work altogether from within outward in the freer
manner of the oriental artist. His emotion and artistic feeling move in this
form and are limited by this artistic convention and are not a pure spiritual or
psychic emotion but usually an imaginative exaltation derived from the
suggestions of life and outward things with a psychic element or an evocation
of spiritual feeling initiated and dominated by the touch of the outward. The
charm that he gives is a sublimation of the beauty that appeals to the outward
senses by the power of the idea and the imagination working on the outward
sense appeal and other beauty is only brought in by association into that
frame. The truth of correspondence he depends upon is a likeness to the
creations of physical Nature and their intellectual, emotional and aesthetic
significances, and his work of line and wave of colour are meant to embody
the flow of this vision. The method of this art is always a transcript from the
visible world with such necessary transmutation as the aesthetic mind
imposes on its materials. At the lowest to illustrate, at the highest to interpret
life and Nature to the mind by identifying it with deeper things through some
derivative touch of the spirit that has entered into and subdued itself to
Page 305

their shapes, \s{pravi\'sya ya\,h pratir\=upo babh\=uva}, is the governing
principle.
\note{All this is no longer true of European art in much of its more prominent
recent developments.}
\par The Indian artist sets out from the other end of the scale of values of
experience which connect life and the spirit. The whole creative force comes
here from a spiritual and psychic vision, the emphasis of the physical is
secondary and always deliberately lightened so as to give an overwhelmingly
spiritual and psychic impression and everything is suppressed which does not
serve this purpose or would distract the mind from the purity of this intention.
This painting expresses the soul through life, but life is only a means of the
spiritual self-expression, and its outward representation is not the first object
or the direct motive. There is a real and a very vivid and vital representation,
but it is more of an inner psychical than of the outward physical life. A critic
of high repute speaking of the Indian influence in a famous Japanese painting
fixes on the grand strongly outlined figures and the feeling for life and
character recalling the Ajanta frescoes as the signs of its Indian character:
but we have to mark carefully the nature of this feeling for life and the origin
and intention of this strong outlining of the figures. The feeling for life and
character here is a very different thing from the splendid and abundant
vitality and the power and force of character which we find in an Italian
painting, a fresco from Michael Angelo's hand or a portrait by Titian or
Tintoretto. The first primitive object of the art of painting is to illustrate life
and Nature and at the lowest this becomes a more or less vigorous and
original or conventionally faithful reproduction, but it rises in great hands to a
revelation of the glory and beauty of the sensuous appeal of life or of the
dramatic power and moving interest of character and emotion and action.
That is a common form of aesthetic work in Europe; but in Indian art it is
never the governing motive. The sensuous appeal is there, but it is refined
into only one and not the chief element of the richness of a soul of psychic
grace and beauty which is for the Indian
Page 306

artist the true beauty, \s{l\=ava\,nya}: the dramatic motive is subordinated and
made only a purely secondary element, only so much is given of character
and action as will help to bring out the deeper spiritual or psychic feeling,
\s{bh\=ava}, and all insistence or too prominent force of these more outwardly
dynamic things is shunned, because that would externalise too much the
spiritual emotion and take away from its intense purity by the interference of
the grosser intensity which emotion puts on in the stress of the active
outward nature. The life depicted is the life of the soul and not, except as a
form and a helping suggestion, the life of the vital being and the body. For the
second more elevated aim of art is the interpretation or intuitive revelation of
existence through the forms of life and Nature and it is this that is the
starting-point of the Indian motive. But the interpretation may proceed on the
basis of the forms already given us by physical Nature and try to evoke by
the form an idea, a truth of the spirit which starts from it as a suggestion and
returns upon it for support, and the effort is then to correlate the form as it is
to the physical eye with the truth which it evokes without overpassing the
limits imposed by the appearance. This is the common method of occidental
art always zealous for the immediate fidelity to Nature which is its idea of
true correspondence, \s{s\=ad\,r\'sya}, but it is rejected by the Indian artist. He
begins from within, sees in his soul the thing he wishes to express or interpret
and tries to discover the right line, colour and design of his intuition which,
when it appears on the physical ground, is not a just and reminding
reproduction of the line, colour and design of physical nature, but much rather
what seems to us a psychical transmutation of the natural figure. In reality
the shapes he paints are the forms of things as he has seen them in the
psychical plane of experience: these are the soul-figures of which physical
things are a gross representation and their purity and subtlety reveals at once
what the physical masks by the thickness of its casings. The lines and colours
sought here are the psychic lines and the psychic hues proper to the vision
which the artist has gone into himself to discover.
\par This is the whole governing principle of the art which gives its stamp to
every detail of an Indian painting and transforms
Page 307

the artist's use of the six limbs of the canon. The distinction of forms is
faithfully observed, but not in the sense of an exact naturalistic fidelity to the
physical appearance with the object of a faithful reproduction of the outward
shapes of the world in which we live. To recall with fidelity something our
eyes have seen or could have seen on the spot, a scene, an interior, a living
and breathing person, and give the aesthetic sense and emotion of it to the
mind is not the motive. There is here an extraordinary vividness, naturalness,
reality, but it is a more than physical reality, a reality which the soul at once
recognises as of its own sphere, a vivid naturalness of psychic truth, the
convincing spirit of the form to which the soul, not the outward naturalness of
the form to which the physical eye bears witness. The truth, the exact
likeness is there, the correspondence, \s{s\=ad\,r\'sya}, but it is the truth of the
essence of the form, it is the likeness of the soul to itself, the reproduction of
the subtle embodiment which is the basis of the physical embodiment, the
purer and finer subtle body of an object which is the very expression of its
own essential nature, \s{svabh\=ava}. The means by which this effect is
produced is characteristic of the inward vision of the Indian mind. It is done
by a bold and firm insistence on the pure and strong outline and a total
suppression of everything that would interfere with its boldness, strength and
purity or would blur over and dilute the intense significance of the line. In the
treatment of the human figure all corporeal filling in of the outline by
insistence on the flesh, the muscle, the anatomical detail is minimised or
disregarded: the strong subtle lines and pure shapes which make the humanity
of the human form are alone brought into relief; the whole essential human
being is there, the divinity that has taken this garb of the spirit to the eye, but
not the superfluous physicality which he carries with him as his burden. It is
the ideal psychical figure and body of man and woman that is before us in its
charm and beauty. The filling in of the line is done in another way; it is
effected by a disposition of pure masses, a design and coloured wave-flow of
the body, \s{bha\.nga}, a simplicity of content that enables the artist to flood
the whole with the significance of the one spiritual emotion, feeling,
suggestion which he intends
Page 308

to convey, his intuition of the moment of the soul, its living self-experience.
All is disposed so as to express that and that alone. The almost miraculously
subtle and meaningful use of the hands to express the psychic suggestion is a
common and well-marked feature of Indian paintings and the way in which
the suggestion of the face and the eyes is subtly repeated or supplemented by
this expression of the hands is always one of the first things that strikes the
regard, but as we continue to look, we see that every turn of the body, the
pose of each limb, the relation and design of all the masses are filled with the
same psychical feeling. The more important accessories help it by a kindred
suggestion or bring it out by a support or variation or extension or relief of the
motive. The same law of significant line and suppression of distracting detail
is applied to animal forms, buildings, trees, objects. There is in all the art an
inspired harmony of conception, method and expression. Colour too is used as
a means for the spiritual and psychic intention, and we can see this well
enough if we study the suggestive significance of the hues in a Buddhist
miniature. This power of line and subtlety of psychic suggestion in the filling
in of the expressive outlines is the source of that remarkable union of
greatness and moving grace which is the stamp of the whole work of Ajanta
and continues in Rajput painting, though there the grandeur of the earlier
work is lost in the grace and replaced by a delicately intense but still bold and
decisive power of vivid and suggestive line. It is this common spirit and
tradition which is the mark of all the truly indigenous work of India.
\par These things have to be carefully understood and held in mind when we
look at an Indian painting and the real spirit of it first grasped before we
condemn or praise. To dwell on that in it which is common to all art is well
enough, but it is what is peculiar to India that is its real essence. And there
again to appreciate the technique and the fervour of religious feeling is not
sufficient; the spiritual intention served by the technique, the psychic
significance of line and colour, the greater thing of which the religious
emotion is the result has to be felt if we would identify ourself with the whole
purpose of the artist. If
Page 309

we look long, for an example, at the adoration group of the mother and child
before the Buddha, one of the most profound, tender and noble of the Ajanta
masterpieces, we shall find that the impression of intense religious feeling of
adoration there is only the most outward general touch in the ensemble of the
emotion. That which it deepens to is the turning of the soul of humanity in
love to the benignant and calm Ineffable which has made itself sensible and
human to us in the universal compassion of the Buddha, and the motive of the
soul moment the painting interprets is the dedication of the awakening mind
of the child, the coming younger humanity, to that in which already the soul of
the mother has learned to find and fix its spiritual joy. The eyes, brows, lips,
face, poise of the head of the woman are filled with this spiritual emotion
which is a continued memory and possession of the psychical release, the
steady settled calm of the heart's experience filled with an ineffable
tenderness, the familiar depths which are yet moved with the wonder and
always farther appeal of something that is infinite, the body and other limbs
are grave masses of this emotion and in their poise a basic embodiment of it,
while the hands prolong it in the dedicative putting forward of her child to
meet the Eternal. This contact of the human and eternal is repeated in the
smaller figure with a subtly and strongly indicated variation, the glad and
childlike smile of awakening which promises but not yet possesses the depths
that are to come, the hands disposed to receive and keep, the body in its
looser curves and waves harmonising with that significance. The two have
forgotten themselves and seem almost to forget or confound each other in
that which they adore and contemplate, and yet the dedicating hands unite
mother and child in the common act and feeling by their simultaneous gesture
of maternal possession and spiritual giving. The two figures have at each
point the same rhythm, but with a significant difference. The simplicity in the
greatness and power, the fullness of expression gained by reserve and
suppression and concentration which we find here is the perfect method of
the classical art of India. And by this perfection Buddhist art became not
merely an illustration of the religion and an expression of its thought and its
religious
Page 310

feeling, history and legend, but a revealing interpretation of the spiritual sense
of Buddhism and its profounder meaning to the soul of India.
\par To understand that—we must always seek first and foremost this kind of
deeper intention—is to understand the reason of the differences between the
occidental and the Indian treatment of the life motives. Thus a portrait by a
great European painter will express with sovereign power the soul through
character, through the active qualities, the ruling powers and passions, the
master feeling and temperament, the active mental and vital man: the Indian
artist tones down the outward-going dynamic indices and gives only so much
of them as will serve to bring out or to modulate something that is more of the
grain of the subtle soul, something more static and impersonal of which our
personality is at once the mask and the index. A moment of the spirit
expressing with purity the permanence of a very subtle soul quality is the
highest type of the Indian portrait. And more generally the feeling for
character which has been noted as a feature of the Ajanta work is of a
similar kind. An Indian painting expressing, let us say, a religious feeling
centred on some significant incident will show the expression in each figure
varied in such a way as to bring out the universal spiritual essence of the
emotion modified by the essential soul type, different waves of the one sea,
all complexity of dramatic insistence is avoided, and so much stress only is
laid on character in the individual feeling as to give the variation without
diminishing the unity of the fundamental emotion. The vividness of life in
these paintings must not obscure for us the more profound purpose for which
it is the setting, and this has especially to be kept in mind in our view of the
later art which has not the greatness of the classic work and runs to a less
grave and highly sustained kind, to lyric emotion, minute vividness of life
movement, the more naive feelings of the people. One sometimes finds
inspiration, decisive power of thought and feeling, originality of creative
imagination denied to this later art; but its real difference from that of Ajanta
is only that the intermediate psychic transmission between the life movement
and the inmost motive has been given
Page 311

with less power and distinctness: the psychic thought and feeling are there
more thrown outward in movement, less contained in the soul, but still the
soul motive is not only present but makes the true atmosphere and if we miss
it, we miss the real sense of the picture. This is more evident where the
inspiration is religious, but it is not absent from the secular subject. Here too
spiritual intention or psychic suggestion are the things of the first importance.
In Ajanta work they are all-important and to ignore them at all is to open the
way to serious errors of interpretation. Thus a highly competent and very
sympathetic critic speaking of the painting of the Great Renunciation says
truly that this great work excels in its expression of sorrow and feeling of
profound pity, but then, looking for what a Western imagination would
naturally put into such a subject, he goes on to speak of the weight of a tragic
decision, the bitterness of renouncing a life of bliss blended with a yearning
sense of hope in the happiness of the future, and that is singularly to
misunderstand the spirit in which the Indian mind turns from the transient to
the eternal, to mistake the Indian art motive and to put a vital into the place of
a spiritual emotion. It is not at all his own personal sorrow but the sorrow of
all others, not an emotional self-pity but a poignant pity for the world, not the
regret for a life of domestic bliss but the afflicting sense of the unreality of
human happiness that is concentrated in the eyes and lips of the Buddha, and
the yearning there is not, certainly, for earthly happiness in the future but for
the spiritual way out, the anguished seeking which found its release, already
foreseen by the spirit behind and hence the immense calm and restraint that
support the sorrow, in the true bliss of Nirvana. There is illustrated the whole
difference between two kinds of imagination, the mental, vital and physical
stress of the art of Europe and the subtle, less forcefully tangible spiritual
stress of the art of India.
\par It is the indigenous art of which this is the constant spirit and tradition,
and it has been doubted whether the Mogul paintings deserve that name,
have anything to do with that tradition and are not rather an exotic
importation from Persia. Almost all oriental art is akin in this respect that the
psychic enters into
Page 312

and for the most part lays its subtler law on the physical vision and the
psychic line and significance give the characteristic turn, are the secret of the
decorative skill, direct the higher art in its principal motive. But there is a
difference between the Persian psychicality which is redolent of the magic of
the middle worlds and the Indian which is only a means of transmission of the
spiritual vision. And obviously the Indo-Persian style is of the former kind and
not indigenous to India. But the Mogul school is not an exotic; there is rather
a blending of two mentalities: on the one side there is a leaning to some kind
of externalism which is not the same thing as Western naturalism, a secular
spirit and certain prominent elements that are more strongly illustrative than
interpretative, but the central thing is still the domination of a transforming
touch which shows that there as in the architecture the Indian mind has taken
hold of another invading mentality and made it a help to a more
outward-going self-expression that comes in as a new side strain in the
spiritual continuity of achievement which began in prehistoric times and
ended only with the general decline of Indian culture. Painting, the last of the
arts in that decline to touch the bottom, has also been the first to rise again
and lift the dawn fires of an era of new creation.
\par It is not necessary to dilate on the decorative arts and crafts of India, for
their excellence has always been beyond dispute. The generalised sense of
beauty which they imply is one of the greatest proofs that there can be of the
value and soundness of a national culture. Indian culture in this respect need
not fear any comparison: if it is less predominantly artistic than that of Japan,
it is because it has put first the spiritual need and made all other things
subservient to and a means for the spiritual growth of the people. Its
civilisation, standing in the first rank in the three great arts as in all things of
the mind, has proved that the spiritual urge is not, as has been vainly
supposed, sterilising to the other activities, but a most powerful force for the
many-sided development of the human whole.
Page 313

\par
\hn XVI
\par
\ht Indian Literature
\par\drop The arts which appeal to the soul through the eye are able to arrive
at a peculiarly concentrated expression of the spirit, the aesthesis and the
creative mind of a people, but it is in its literature that we must seek for its
most flexible and many-sided self-expression, for it is the word used in all its
power of clear figure or its threads of suggestion that carries to us most
subtly and variably the shades and turns and teeming significances of the
inner self in its manifestation. The greatness of a literature lies first in the
greatness and worth of its substance, the value of its thought and the beauty
of its forms, but also in the degree to which, satisfying the highest conditions
of the art of speech, it avails to bring out and raise the soul and life or the
living and the ideal mind of a people, an age, a culture, through the genius of
some of its greatest or most sensitive representative spirits. And if we ask
what in both these respects is the achievement of the Indian mind as it has
come down to us in the Sanskrit and other literatures, we might surely say
that here at least there is little room for any just depreciation and denial even
by a mind the most disposed to quarrel with the effect on life and the
character of the culture. The ancient and classical creations of the Sanskrit
tongue both in quality and in body and abundance of excellence, in their
potent originality and force and beauty, in their substance and art and
structure, in grandeur and justice and charm of speech and in the height and
width of the reach of their spirit stand very evidently in the front rank among
the world's great literatures. The language itself, as has been universally
recognised by those competent to form a judgment, is one of the most
magnificent, the most perfect and wonderfully sufficient literary instruments
developed by the human mind, at once majestic and sweet and flexible, strong
and clearly-formed and full and vibrant and subtle, and its quality and
character would be
Page 314

of itself a sufficient evidence of the character and quality of the race whose
mind it expressed and the culture of which it was the reflecting medium. The
great and noble use made of it by poet and thinker did not fall below the
splendour of its capacities. Nor is it in the Sanskrit tongue alone that the
Indian mind has done high and beautiful and perfect things, though it couched
in that language the larger part of its most prominent and formative and
grandest creations. It would be necessary for a complete estimate to take
into account as well the Buddhistic literature in Pali and the poetic literatures,
here opulent, there more scanty in production, of about a dozen Sanskritic and
Dravidian tongues. The whole has almost a continental effect and does not
fall so far short in the quantity of its really lasting things and equals in its
things of best excellence the work of ancient and mediaeval and modern
Europe. The people and the civilisation that count among their great works
and their great names the Veda and the Upanishads, the mighty structures of
the Mahabharata and the Ramayana, Kalidasa and Bhavabhuti and
Bhartrihari and Jayadeva and the other rich creations of classical Indian
drama and poetry and romance, the Dhammapada and the Jatakas, the
Panchatantra, Tulsidas, Vidyapati and Chandidas and Ramprasad, Ramdas
and Tukaram, Tiruvalluvar and Kamban and the songs of Nanak and Kabir
and Mirabai and the southern Shaiva saints and the Alwars,—to name only
the best-known writers and most characteristic productions, though there is a
very large body of other work in the different tongues of both the first and
the second excellence,—must surely be counted among the greatest
civilisations and the world's most developed and creative peoples. A mental
activity so great and of so fine a quality commencing more than three
thousand years ago and still not exhausted is unique and the best and most
undeniable witness to something extraordinarily sound and vital in the culture.
\par A criticism that ignores or belittles the significance of this unsurpassed
record and this splendour of the self-expressing spirit and the creative
intelligence, stands convicted at once of a blind malignity or an invincible
prejudice and does not merit
Page 315

refutation. It would be a sheer waste of time and energy to review the
objections raised by our devil's advocate: for nothing vital to the greatness of
a literature is really in dispute and there is only to the credit of the attack a
general distortion and denunciation and a laborious and exaggerated cavilling
at details and idiosyncracies which at most show a difference between the
idealising mind and abundant imagination of India and the more realistically
observant mind and less rich and exuberant imagination of Europe. The fit
parallel to this motive and style of criticism would be if an Indian critic who
had read European literature only in bad or ineffective Indian translations,
were to pass it under a hostile and disparaging review, dismiss the Iliad as a
crude and empty semi-savage and primitive epos, Dante's great work as the
nightmare of a cruel and superstitious religious fantasy, Shakespeare as a
drunken barbarian of considerable genius with an epileptic imagination, the
whole drama of Greece and Spain and England as a mass of bad ethics and
violent horrors, French poetry as a succession of bald or tawdry rhetorical
exercises and French fiction as a tainted and immoral thing, a long sacrifice
on the altar of the goddess Lubricity, admit here and there a minor merit, but
make no attempt at all to understand the central spirit or aesthetic quality or
principle of structure and conclude on the strength of his own absurd method
that the ideals of both Pagan and Christian Europe were altogether false and
bad and its imagination afflicted with a “habitual and ancestral” earthiness,
morbidity, poverty and disorder. No criticism would be worth making on such
a mass of absurdities, and in this equally ridiculous philippic only a stray
observation or two less inconsequent and opaque than the others perhaps
demands a passing notice. But although these futilities do not at all represent
the genuine view of the general European mind on the subject of Indian
poetry and literature, still one finds a frequent inability to appreciate the spirit
or the form or the aesthetic value of Indian writing and especially its
perfection and power as an expression of the cultural mind of the people.
One meets such criticisms even from sympathetic critics as an admission of
the vigour, colour and splendour of Indian poetry followed by a
Page 316

conclusion that for all that it does not satisfy, and this means that the
intellectual and temperamental misunderstanding extends to some degree
even to this field of creation where different minds meet more readily than in
painting and sculpture, that there is a rift between the two mentalities and
what is delightful and packed with meaning and power to the one has no
substance, but only a form, of aesthetic or intellectual pleasure for the other.
This difficulty is partly due to an inability to enter into the living spirit and feel
the vital touch of the language, but partly to a spiritual difference in similarity
which is even more baffling than a complete dissimilarity and otherness.
Chinese poetry for example is altogether of its own kind and it is more
possible for a Western mentality, when it does not altogether pass it by as an
alien world, to develop an undisturbed appreciation because the receptivity of
the mind is not checked or hampered by any disturbing memories or
comparisons. Indian poetry on the contrary, like the poetry of Europe, is the
creation of an Aryan or Aryanised national mind, starts apparently from
similar motives, moves on the same plane, uses cognate forms, and yet has
something quite different in its spirit which creates a pronounced and
separating divergence in its aesthetic tones, type of imagination, turn of
self-expression, ideative mind, method, form, structure. The mind accustomed
to the European idea and technique expects the same kind of satisfaction
here and does not meet it, feels a baffling difference to whose secret it is a
stranger, and the subtly pursuing comparison and vain expectation stand in
the way of a full receptivity and intimate understanding. At bottom it is an
insufficient comprehension of the quite different spirit behind, the different
heart of this culture that produces the mingled attraction and dissatisfaction.
The subject is too large to be dealt with adequately in small limits: I shall only
attempt to bring out certain points by a consideration of some of the most
representative master works of creative intuition and imagination taken as a
record of the soul and mind of the Indian people.
\par The early mind of India in the magnificent youth of the nation, when a
fathomless spiritual insight was at work, a subtle
Page 317

intuitive vision and a deep, clear and greatly outlined intellectual and ethical
thinking and heroic action and creation which founded and traced the plan
and made the permanent structure of her unique culture and civilisation, is
represented by four of the supreme productions of her genius, the Veda, the
Upanishads and the two vast epics, and each of them is of a kind, a form and
an intention not easily paralleled in any other literature. The two first are the
visible foundation of her spiritual and religious being, the others a large
creative interpretation of her greatest period of life, of the ideas that informed
and the ideals that governed it and the figures in which she saw man and
Nature and God and the powers of the universe. The Veda gave us the first
types and figures of these things as seen and formed by an imaged spiritual
intuition and psychological and religious experience; the Upanishads
constantly breaking through and beyond form and symbol and image without
entirely abandoning them, since always they come in as accompaniment or
undertone, reveal in a unique kind of poetry the ultimate and unsurpassable
truths of self and God and man and the world and its principles and powers in
their most essential, their profoundest and most intimate and their most ample
realities,—highest mysteries and clarities vividly seen in an irresistible, an
unwalled perception that has got through the intuitive and psychological to the
sheer spiritual vision. And after that we have powerful and beautiful
developments of the intellect and the life and of ideal, ethical, aesthetic,
psychic, emotional and sensuous and physical knowledge and idea and vision
and experience of which the epics are the early record and the rest of the
literature the continuation; but the foundation remains the same throughout,
and whatever new and often larger types and significant figures replace the
old or intervene to add and modify and alter the whole ensemble, are in their
essential build and character transmutations and extensions of the original
vision and first spiritual experience and never an unconnected departure.
There is a persistence, a continuity of the Indian mind in its literary creation in
spite of great changes as consistent as that which we find in painting and
sculpture.
Page 318

\par The Veda is the creation of an early intuitive and symbolical mentality to
which the later mind of man, strongly intellectualised and governed on the one
side by reasoning idea and abstract conception, on the other hand by the facts
of life and matter accepted as they present themselves to the senses and
positive intelligence without seeking in them for any divine or mystic
significance, indulging the imagination as a play of the aesthetic fancy rather
than as an opener of the doors of truth and only trusting to its suggestions
when they are confirmed by the logical reason or by physical experience,
aware only of carefully intellectualised intuitions and recalcitrant for the most
part to any others, has grown a total stranger. It is not surprising therefore
that the Veda should have become unintelligible to our minds except in its
most outward shell of language, and that even very imperfectly known owing
to the obstacle of an antique and ill-understood diction, and that the most
inadequate interpretations should be made which reduce this great creation of
the young and splendid mind of humanity to a botched and defaced scrawl, an
incoherent hotch-potch of the absurdities of a primitive imagination perplexing
what would be otherwise the quite plain, flat and common record of a
naturalistic religion which mirrored only and could only minister to the crude
and materialistic desires of a barbaric life mind. The Veda became to the
later scholastic and ritualistic idea of Indian priests and pundits nothing better
than a book of mythology and sacrificial ceremonies; European scholars
seeking in it for what was alone to them of any rational interest, the history,
myths and popular religious notions of a primitive people, have done yet
worse wrong to the Veda and by insisting on a wholly external rendering still
farther stripped it of its spiritual interest and its poetic greatness and beauty.
\par But this was not what it was to the Vedic Rishis themselves or to the
great seers and thinkers who came after them and developed out of their
pregnant and luminous intuitions their own wonderful structures of thought
and speech built upon an unexampled spiritual revelation and experience. The
Veda was
Page 319

to these early seers the Word discovering the Truth and clothing in image and
symbol the mystic significances of life. It was a divine discovery and
unveiling of the potencies of the word, of its mysterious revealing and
creative capacity, not the word of the logical and reasoning or the aesthetic
intelligence, but the intuitive and inspired rhythmic utterance, the mantra.
Image and myth were freely used, not as an imaginative indulgence, but as
living parables and symbols of things that were very real to their speakers
and could not otherwise find their own intimate and native shape in utterance,
and the imagination itself was a priest of greater realities than those that meet
and hold the eye and mind limited by the external suggestions of life and the
physical existence. This was their idea of the sacred poet, a mind visited by
some highest light and its forms of idea and word, a seer and hearer of the
Truth, \sforced{kavaya\,h satya\'sruta\,h}. The poets of the Vedic verse certainly
did not regard their function as it is represented by modern scholars, they did
not look on themselves as a sort of superior medicine-men and makers of
hymn and incantation to a robust and barbarous tribe, but as seers and
thinkers, \s{\,r\,si}, \s{dh\=ira}. These singers believed that they were in
possession of a high, mystic and hidden truth, claimed to be the bearers of a
speech acceptable to a divine knowledge, and expressly so speak of their
utterances, as secret words which declare their whole significance only to the
seer, \sforced{kavaye nivacan\=a ni\,ny\=a vac\=a\.msi}. And to those who came
after them the Veda was a book of knowledge, and even of the supreme
knowledge, a revelation, a great utterance of eternal and impersonal truth as
it had been seen and heard in the inner experience of inspired and semi-divine
thinkers. The smallest circumstances of the sacrifice around which the
hymns were written were intended to carry a symbolic and psychological
power of significance, as was well known to the writers of the ancient
Brahmanas. The sacred verses, each by itself held to be full of a divine
meaning, were taken by the thinkers of the Upanishads as the profound and
pregnant seed-words of the truth they sought and the highest authority they
could give for their own sublime utterances was a supporting citation from
their predecessors with the formula,
Page 320

\s{tad e\,s\=a \,rc\=abhyukt\=a}, “This is that word which was spoken by the Rig
Veda.” Western scholars choose to imagine that the successors of the Vedic
Rishis were in error, that, except for some later hymns, they put a false and
non-existent meaning into the old verses and that they themselves, divided
from the Rishis not only by ages of time but by many gulfs and separating
seas of an intellectualised mentality, know infinitely better. But mere common
sense ought to tell us that those who were so much nearer in both ways to
the original poets had a better chance of holding at least the essential truth of
the matter and suggests at least the strong probability that the Veda was
really what it professes to be, the seeking for a mystic knowledge, the first
form of the constant attempt of the Indian mind, to which it has always been
faithful, to look beyond the appearances of the physical world and through its
own inner experiences to the godheads, powers, self-existence of the One of
whom the sages speak variously—the famous phrase in which the Veda
utters its own central secret, \s{eka\.m sad vipr\=a bahudh\=a vadanti}.
\par The real character of the Veda can best be understood by taking it
anywhere and rendering it straightforwardly according to its own phrases and
images. A famous German scholar rating from his high pedestal of superior
intelligence the silly persons who find sublimity in the Veda, tells us that it is
full of childish, silly, even monstrous conceptions, that it is tedious, low,
commonplace, that it represents human nature on a low level of selfishness
and worldliness and that only here and there are a few rare sentiments that
come from the depths of the soul. It may be made so if we put our own
mental conceptions into the words of the Rishis, but if we read them as they
are without any such false translation into what we think early barbarians
ought to have said and thought, we shall find instead a sacred poetry sublime
and powerful in its words and images, though with another kind of language
and imagination than we now prefer and appreciate, deep and subtle in its
psychological experience and stirred by a moved soul of vision and utterance.
Hear rather the word itself of the Veda.
Page 321

\par
\BF States upon states are born, covering over covering
\note{Or, “the coverer of the coverer”.} awakens to knowledge: in the lap of
the mother he wholly sees. They have called to him, getting a wide
knowledge, they guard sleeplessly the strength, they have entered into the
strong city. The peoples born on earth increase the luminous (force) of the
son of the White Mother; he has gold on his neck, he is large of speech, he is
as if by (the power of) this honey wine a seeker of plenty. He is like pleasant
and desirable milk, he is a thing uncompanioned and is with the two who are
companions and is as a heat that is the belly of plenty and is invincible and an
overcomer of many. Play, O Ray, and manifest thyself.
\note{Literally, “become towards us”.}
\par
\PF Or again in the succeeding hymn,—
\par
\BF Those (flames) of thee, the forceful (godhead), that move not and are
increased and puissant, uncling the hostility and crookedness of one who has
another law. O Fire, we choose thee for our priest and the means of
effectuation of our strength and in the sacrifices bringing the food of thy
pleasure we call thee by the word.\sdots . . .  O god of perfect works, may
we be for the felicity, for the truth, revelling with the rays, revelling with the
heroes.
\par
\PF And finally let us take the bulk of the third hymn that follows couched in
the ordinary symbols of the sacrifice,—
\par
\BF As the Manu we set thee in thy place, as the Manu we kindle thee: O
Fire, O Angiras, as the Manu sacrifice to the gods for him who desires the
godheads. O Fire, well pleased thou art kindled in the human being and the
ladles go to thee continually.\sdots . . .  Thee all the gods with one pleasure
(in thee) made their messenger and serving thee, O seer, (men) in the
sacrifices adore the god. Let the mortal adore the divine Fire with sacrifice
Page 322

to the godheads. Kindled, flame forth, O Bright One. Sit in the seat of Truth,
sit in the seat of peace.
\note{I have translated these passages with as close a literalness as the
English language will admit. Let the reader compare the original and judge
whether this is not the sense of the verses.}
\par
\PF That, whatever interpretation we choose to put on its images, is a mystic
and symbolic poetry and that is the real Veda.
\par The character of Vedic poetry apparent from these typical verses need
not surprise or baffle us when we see what will be evident from a
comparative study of Asiatic literature, that though distinguished by its theory
and treatment of the Word, its peculiar system of images and the complexity
of its thought and symbolised experience, it is in fact the beginning of a form
of symbolic or figurative imagery for the poetic expression of spiritual
experience which reappears constantly in later Indian writing, the figures of
the Tantras and Puranas, the figures of the Vaishnava poets,—one might add
even a certain element in the modern poetry of Tagore,—and has its kindred
movements in certain Chinese poets and in the images of the Sufis. The poet
has to express a spiritual and psychical knowledge and experience and he
cannot do it altogether or mainly in the more abstract language of the
philosophical thinker, for he has to bring out, not the naked idea of it, but as
vividly as possible its very life and most intimate touches. He has to reveal in
one way or another a whole world within him and the quite inner and spiritual
significances of the world around him and also, it may well be, godheads,
powers, visions and experiences of planes of consciousness other than the
one with which our normal minds are familiar. He uses or starts with the
images taken from his own normal and outward life and that of humanity and
from visible Nature, and though they do not of themselves actually express,
yet obliges them to express by implication or to figure the spiritual and
psychic idea and experience. He takes them selecting freely his notation of
images according to his insight or imagination and transmutes them into
instruments of another significance and at the same time pours a direct
spiritual
Page 323

meaning into the Nature and life to which they belong, applies outward
figures to inner things and brings out their latent and inner spiritual or psychic
significance into life's outward figures and circumstances. Or an outward
figure nearest to the inward experience, its material counterpart, is taken
throughout and used with such realism and consistency that while it indicates
to those who possess it the spiritual experience, it means only the external
thing to others,—just as the Vaishnava poetry of Bengal makes to the devout
mind a physical and emotional image or suggestion of the love of the human
soul for God, but to the profane is nothing but a sensuous and passionate love
poetry hung conventionally round the traditional human-divine personalities of
Krishna and Radha. The two methods may meet together, the fixed system
of outward images be used as the body of the poetry, while freedom is often
taken to pass their first limits, to treat them only as initial suggestions and
transmute subtly or even cast them aside or subdue into a secondary strain or
carry them out of themselves so that the translucent veil they offer to our
minds lifts from or passes into the open revelation. The last is the method of
the Veda and it varies according to the passion and stress of the sight in the
poet or the exaltation of his utterance.
\par The poets of the Veda had another mentality than ours, their use of their
images is of a peculiar kind and an antique cast of vision gives a strange
outline to their substance. The physical and the psychical worlds were to their
eyes a manifestation and a twofold and diverse and yet connected and similar
figure of cosmic godheads, the inner and outer life of man a divine commerce
with the gods, and behind was the one spirit or being of which the gods were
names and personalities and powers. These godheads were at once masters
of physical Nature and its principles and forms their godheads and their
bodies and inward divine powers with their corresponding states and energies
born in our psychic being because they are the soul powers of the cosmos,
the guardians of truth and immortality, the children of the Infinite, and each of
them too is in his origin and his last reality the supreme Spirit putting in front
one of his aspects. The life of
Page 324

man was to these seers a thing of mixed truth and falsehood, a movement
from mortality to immortality, from mixed light and darkness to the splendour
of a divine Truth whose home is above in the Infinite but which can be built
up here in man's soul and life, a battle between the children of light and the
sons of Night, a getting of treasure, of the wealth, the booty given by the gods
to the human warrior, and a journey and a sacrifice; and of these things they
spoke in a fixed system of images taken from Nature and from the
surrounding life of the war-like, pastoral and agricultural Aryan peoples and
centred round the cult of Fire and the worship of the powers of living Nature
and the institution of sacrifice. The details of outward existence and of the
sacrifice were in their life and practice symbols, and in their poetry not dead
symbols or artificial metaphors, but living and powerful suggestions and
counterparts of inner things. And they used too for their expression a fixed
and yet variable body of other images and a glowing web of myth and
parable, images that became parables, parables that became myths and
myths that remained always images, and yet all these things were to them, in
a way that can only be understood by those who have entered into a certain
order of psychic experience, actual realities. The physical melted its shades
into the lustres of the psychic, the psychic deepened into the light of the
spiritual and there was no sharp dividing line in the transition, but a natural
blending and intershading of their suggestions and colours. It is evident that a
poetry of this kind, written by men with this kind of vision or imagination,
cannot either be interpreted or judged by the standards of a reason and taste
observant only of the canons of the physical existence. The invocation “Play,
O Ray, and become towards us” is at once a suggestion of the leaping up and
radiant play of the potent sacrificial flame on the physical altar and of a
similar psychical phenomenon, the manifestation of the saving flame of a
divine power and light within us. The Western critic sneers at the bold and
reckless and to him monstrous image in which Indra son of earth and heaven
is said to create his own father and mother; but if we remember that Indra is
the supreme spirit in one of its eternal and constant aspects, creator of earth
Page 325

and heaven, born as a cosmic godhead between the mental and physical
worlds and recreating their powers in man, we shall see that the image is not
only a powerful but in fact a true and revealing figure, and in the Vedic
technique it does not matter that it outrages the physical imagination since it
expresses a greater actuality as no other figure could have done with the
same awakening aptness and vivid poetical force. The Bull and Cow of the
Veda, the shining herds of the Sun lying hidden in the cave are strange
enough creatures to the physical mind, but they do not belong to the earth and
in their own plane they are at once images and actual things and full of life
and significance. It is in this way that throughout we must interpret and
receive the Vedic poetry according to its own spirit and vision and the
psychically natural, even if to us strange and supranatural, truth of its ideas
and figures.
\par The Veda thus understood stands out, apart from its interest as the
world's first yet extant Scripture, its earliest interpretation of man and the
Divine and the universe, as a remarkable, a sublime and powerful poetic
creation. It is in its form and speech no barbaric production. The Vedic poets
are masters of a consummate technique, their rhythms are carved like
chariots of the gods and borne on divine and ample wings of sound, and are
at once concentrated and wide-waved, great in movement and subtle in
modulation, their speech lyric by intensity and epic by elevation, an utterance
of great power, pure and bold and grand in outline, a speech direct and brief
in impact, full to overflowing in sense and suggestion so that each verse
exists at once as a strong and sufficient thing in itself and takes its place as a
large step between what came before and what comes after. A sacred and
hieratic tradition faithfully followed gave them both their form and substance,
but this substance consisted of the deepest psychic and spiritual experiences
of which the human soul is capable and the forms seldom or never
degenerate into a convention, because what they are intended to convey was
lived in himself by each poet and made new to his own mind in expression by
the subtleties or sublimities of his individual vision. The utterances of the
greatest seers, Vishwamitra, Vamadeva,
Page 326

Dirghatamas and many others, touch the most extraordinary heights and
amplitudes of a sublime and mystic poetry and there are poems like the
Hymn of Creation that move in a powerful clarity on the summits of thought
on which the Upanishads lived constantly with a more sustained breathing.
The mind of ancient India did not err when it traced back all its philosophy,
religion and essential things of its culture to these seer-poets, for all the future
spirituality of her people is contained there in seed or in first expression.
\par It is one great importance of a right understanding of the Vedic hymns
as a form of sacred literature that it helps us to see the original shaping not
only of the master ideas that governed the mind of India, but of its
characteristic types of spiritual experience, its turn of imagination, its creative
temperament and the kind of significant forms in which it persistently
interpreted its sight of self and things and life and the universe. It is in a great
part of the literature the same turn of inspiration and self-expression that we
see in the architecture, painting and sculpture. Its first character is a constant
sense of the infinite, the cosmic, and of things as seen in or affected by the
cosmic vision, set in or against the amplitude of the one and infinite; its
second peculiarity is a tendency to see and render its spiritual experience in a
great richness of images taken from the inner psychic plane or in physical
images transmuted by the stress of a psychic significance and impression and
line and idea colour; and its third tendency is to image the terrestrial life often
magnified, as in the Mahabharata and Ramayana, or else subtilised in the
transparencies of a larger atmosphere, attended by a greater than the
terrestrial meaning or at any rate presented against the background of the
spiritual and psychic worlds and not alone in its own separate figure. The
spiritual, the infinite is near and real and the gods are real and the worlds
beyond not so much beyond as immanent in our own existence. That which
to the Western mind is myth and imagination is here an actuality and a strand
of the life of our inner being, what is there beautiful poetic idea and
philosophic speculation is here a thing constantly realised and present to the
experience. It is this turn of the Indian
Page 327

mind, its spiritual sincerity and psychic positivism, that makes the Veda and
Upanishads and the later religious and religio-philosophic poetry so powerful
in inspiration and intimate and living in expression and image, and it has its
less absorbing but still very sensible effect on the working of the poetic idea
and imagination even in the more secular literature.
Page 328

\par
\hn XVII
\par
\ht Indian Literature–2
\par\drop The Upanishads are the supreme work of the Indian mind, and that
it should be so, that the highest self-expression of its genius, its sublimest
poetry, its greatest creation of the thought and word should be not a literary
or poetical masterpiece of the ordinary kind, but a large flood of spiritual
revelation of this direct and profound character, is a significant fact, evidence
of a unique mentality and unusual turn of spirit. The Upanishads are at once
profound religious scriptures,—for they are a record of the deepest spiritual
experiences,—documents of revelatory and intuitive philosophy of an
inexhaustible light, power and largeness and, whether written in verse or
cadenced prose, spiritual poems of an absolute, an unfailing inspiration
inevitable in phrase, wonderful in rhythm and expression. It is the expression
of a mind in which philosophy and religion and poetry are made one, because
this religion does not end with a cult nor is limited to a religio-ethical
aspiration, but rises to an infinite discovery of God, of Self, of our highest and
whole reality of spirit and being and speaks out of an ecstasy of luminous
knowledge and an ecstasy of moved and fulfilled experience, this philosophy
is not an abstract intellectual speculation about Truth or a structure of the
logical intelligence, but Truth seen, felt, lived, held by the inmost mind and
soul in the joy of utterance of an assured discovery and possession, and this
poetry is the work of the aesthetic mind lifted up beyond its ordinary field to
express the wonder and beauty of the rarest spiritual self-vision and the
profoundest illumined truth of self and God and universe. Here the intuitive
mind and intimate psychological experience of the Vedic seers passes into a
supreme culmination in which the Spirit, as is said in a phrase of the Katha
Upanishad, discloses its own very body, reveals the very word of its
self-expression and discovers to
Page 329

the mind the vibration of rhythms which repeating themselves within in the
spiritual hearing seem to build up the soul and set it satisfied and complete on
the heights of self-knowledge.
\par This character of the Upanishads needs to be insisted upon with a strong
emphasis, because it is ignored by foreign translators who seek to bring out
the intellectual sense without feeling the life of thought vision and the ecstasy
of spiritual experience which made the ancient verses appear then and still
make them to those who can enter into the element in which these utterances
move, a revelation not to the intellect alone, but to the soul and the whole
being, make of them in the old expressive word not intellectual thought and
phrase, but Sruti, spiritual audience, an inspired Scripture. The philosophical
substance of the Upanishads demands at this day no farther stress of
appreciation of its value; for even if the amplest acknowledgement by the
greatest minds were wanting, the whole history of philosophy would be there
to offer its evidence. The Upanishads have been the acknowledged source of
numerous profound philosophies and religions that flowed from it in India like
her great rivers from their Himalayan cradle fertilising the mind and life of
the people and kept its soul alive through the long procession of the centuries,
constantly returned to for light, never failing to give fresh illumination, a
fountain of inexhaustible life-giving waters. Buddhism with all its
developments was only a restatement, although from a new standpoint and
with fresh terms of intellectual definition and reasoning, of one side of its
experience and it carried it thus changed in form but hardly in substance over
all Asia and westward towards Europe. The ideas of the Upanishads can be
rediscovered in much of the thought of Pythagoras and Plato and form the
profoundest part of Neo-platonism and Gnosticism with all their considerable
consequences to the philosophical thinking of the West, and Sufism only
repeats them in another religious language. The larger part of German
metaphysics is little more in substance than an intellectual development of
great realities more spiritually seen in this ancient teaching, and modern
thought is rapidly absorbing them with a closer, more living and intense
receptiveness which
Page 330

promises a revolution both in philosophical and in religious thinking; here they
are filtering in through many indirect influences, there slowly pouring through
direct and open channels. There is hardly a main philosophical idea which
cannot find an authority or a seed or indication in these antique writings—the
speculations, according to a certain view, of thinkers who had no better past
or background to their thought than a crude, barbaric, naturalistic and
animistic ignorance. And even the larger generalisations of Science are
constantly found to apply to the truth of physical Nature formulas already
discovered by the Indian sages in their original, their largest meaning in the
deeper truth of the spirit.
\par And yet these works are not philosophical speculations of the intellectual
kind, a metaphysical analysis which labours to define notions, to select ideas
and discriminate those that are true, to logicise truth or else to support the
mind in its intellectual preferences by dialectical reasoning and is content to
put forward an exclusive solution of existence in the light of this or that idea
of the reason and see all things from that viewpoint, in that focus and
determining perspective. The Upanishads could not have had so undying a
vitality, exercised so unfailing an influence, produced such results or seen
now their affirmations independently justified in other spheres of inquiry and
by quite opposite methods, if they had been of that character. It is because
these seers saw Truth rather than merely thought it, clothed it indeed with a
strong body of intuitive idea and disclosing image, but a body of ideal
transparency through which we look into the illimitable, because they
fathomed things in the light of self-existence and saw them with the eye of
the Infinite, that their words remain always alive and immortal, of an
inexhaustible significance, an inevitable authenticity, a satisfying finality that is
at the same time an infinite commencement of truth, to which all our lines of
investigation when they go through to their end arrive again and to which
humanity constantly returns in its minds and its ages of greatest vision. The
Upanishads are Vedanta, a book of knowledge in a higher degree even than
the Vedas, but knowledge in the profounder Indian sense of
Page 331

the word, Jnana. Not a mere thinking and considering by the intelligence, the
pursuit and grasping of a mental form of truth by the intellectual mind, but a
seeing of it with the soul and a total living in it with the power of the inner
being, a spiritual seizing by a kind of identification with the object of
knowledge is Jnana. And because it is only by an integral knowing of the self
that this kind of direct knowledge can be made complete, it was the self that
the Vedantic sages sought to know, to live in and to be one with it by identity.
And through this endeavour they came easily to see that the self in us is one
with the universal self of all things and that this self again is the same as God
and Brahman, a transcendent Being or Existence, and they beheld, felt, lived
in the inmost truth of all things in the universe and the inmost truth of man's
inner and outer existence by the light of this one and unifying vision. The
Upanishads are epic hymns of self-knowledge and world-knowledge and
God-knowledge. The great formulations of philosophic truth with which they
abound are not abstract intellectual generalisations, things that may shine and
enlighten the mind, but do not live and move the soul to ascension, but are
ardours as well as lights of an intuitive and revelatory illumination, reachings
as well as seeings of the one Existence, the transcendent Godhead, the divine
and universal Self and discoveries of his relation with things and creatures in
this great cosmic manifestation. Chants of inspired knowledge, they breathe
like all hymns a tone of religious aspiration and ecstasy, not of the narrowly
intense kind proper to a lesser religious feeling, but raised beyond cult and
special forms of devotion to the universal Ananda of the Divine which comes
to us by approach to and oneness with the self-existent and universal spirit.
And though mainly concerned with an inner vision and not directly with
outward human action, all the highest ethics of Buddhism and later Hinduism
are still emergences of the very life and significance of the truths to which
they give expressive form and force,—and there is something greater than
any ethical precept and mental rule of virtue, the supreme ideal of a spiritual
action founded on oneness with God and all living beings. Therefore even
when the life of the forms of the
Page 332

Vedic cult had passed away, the Upanishads still remained alive and creative
and could generate the great devotional religions and motive the persistent
Indian idea of the Dharma.
\par The Upanishads are the creation of a revelatory and intuitive mind and
its illumined experience, and all their substance, structure, phrase, imagery,
movement are determined by and stamped with this original character. These
supreme and all-embracing truths, these visions of oneness and self and a
universal divine being are cast into brief and monumental phrases which bring
them at once before the soul's eye and make them real and imperative to its
aspiration and experience or are couched in poetic sentences full of revealing
power and suggestive thought-colour that discover a whole infinite through a
finite image. The One is there revealed, but also disclosed the many aspects,
and each is given its whole significance by the amplitude of the expression
and finds as if in a spontaneous self-discovery its place and its connection by
the illumining justness of each word and all the phrase. The largest
metaphysical truths and the subtlest subtleties of psychological experience
are taken up into the inspired movement and made at once precise to the
seeing mind and loaded with unending suggestion to the discovering spirit.
There are separate phrases, single couplets, brief passages which contain
each in itself the substance of a vast philosophy and yet each is only thrown
out as a side, an aspect, a portion of the infinite self-knowledge. All here is a
packed and pregnant and yet perfectly lucid and luminous brevity and an
immeasurable completeness. A thought of this kind cannot follow the tardy,
careful and diffuse development of the logical intelligence. The passage, the
sentence, the couplet, the line, even the half line follows the one that
precedes with a certain interval full of an unexpressed thought, an echoing
silence between them, a thought which is carried in the total suggestion and
implied in the step itself, but which the mind is left to work out for its own
profit, and these intervals of pregnant silence are large, the steps of this
thought are like the paces of a Titan striding from rock to distant rock across
infinite waters. There is a perfect totality, a comprehensive connection of
harmonious parts in the structure
Page 333

of each Upanishad; but it is done in the way of a mind that sees masses of
truth at a time and stops to bring only the needed word out of a filled silence.
The rhythm in verse or cadenced prose corresponds to the sculpture of the
thought and the phrase. The metrical forms of the Upanishads are made up
of four half lines each clearly cut, the lines mostly complete in themselves
and integral in sense, the half lines presenting two thoughts or distinct parts of
a thought that are wedded to and complete each other, and the sound
movement follows a corresponding principle, each step brief and marked off
by the distinctness of its pause, full of echoing cadences that remain long
vibrating in the inner hearing: each is as if a wave of the infinite that carries
in it the whole voice and rumour of the ocean. It is a kind of poetry—word of
vision, rhythm of the spirit,—that has not been written before or after.
\par The imagery of the Upanishads is in large part developed from the type
of imagery of the Veda and though very ordinarily it prefers an unveiled
clarity of directly illuminative image, not unoften also it uses the same
symbols in a way that is closely akin to the spirit and to the less technical part
of the method of the older symbolism. It is to a great extent this element no
longer seizable by our way of thinking that has baffled certain Western
scholars and made them cry out that these scriptures are a mixture of the
sublimest philosophical speculations with the first awkward stammerings of
the child mind of humanity. The Upanishads are not a revolutionary departure
from the Vedic mind and its temperament and fundamental ideas, but a
continuation and development and to a certain extent an enlarging
transformation in the sense of bringing out into open expression all that was
held covered in the symbolic Vedic speech as a mystery and a secret. It
begins by taking up the imagery and the ritual symbols of the Veda and the
Brahmanas and turning them in such a way as to bring out an inner and a
mystic sense which will serve as a sort of psychical starting-point for its own
more highly evolved and more purely spiritual philosophy. There are a
number of passages especially in the prose Upanishads which are entirely of
this kind and deal, in a manner recondite, obscure
Page 334

and even unintelligible to the modern understanding, with the psychic sense of
ideas then current in the Vedic religious mind, the distinction between the
three kinds of Veda, the three worlds and other similar subjects; but, leading
as they do in the thought of the Upanishads to deepest spiritual truths, these
passages cannot be dismissed as childish aberrations of the intelligence void
of sense or of any discoverable bearing on the higher thought in which they
culminate. On the contrary we find that they have a deep enough significance
once we can get inside their symbolic meaning. That appears in a
psycho-physical passing upward into a psycho-spiritual knowledge for which
we would now use more intellectual, less concrete and imaged terms, but
which is still valid for those who practise Yoga and rediscover the secrets of
our psycho-physical and psycho-spiritual being. Typical passages of this kind
of peculiar expression of psychic truths are Ajatashatru's explanation of sleep
and dream or the passages of the Prasna Upanishad on the vital principle and
its motions, or those in which the Vedic idea of the struggle between the
Gods and the demons is taken up and given its spiritual significance and the
Vedic godheads more openly than in Rik and Saman characterised and
invoked in their inner function and spiritual power.
\par I may cite as an example of this development of Vedic idea and image a
passage of the Taittiriya in which Indra plainly appears as the power and
godhead of the divine mind:
\par
\BF He who is the Bull of the Vedas of the universal form, he who was born
in the sacred rhythms from the Immortal,—may Indra satisfy me through the
intelligence. O God, may I become a vessel of the Immortal. May my body
be full of vision and my tongue of sweetness, may I hear the much and vast
with my ears. For thou art the sheath of Brahman covered over and hidden
by the intelligence.
\par
\PF And a kindred passage may also be cited from the Isha in which Surya
the Sun-God is invoked as the godhead of knowledge whose supreme form of
effulgence is the oneness of the Spirit and his rays dispersed here on the
mental level are the \NH shining
Page 335

diffusion of the thought mind and conceal his own infinite supramental truth,
the body and self of this Sun, the truth of the spirit and the Eternal:
\par
\BF The face of the Truth is covered with a golden lid: O fostering Sun, that
uncover for the law of the truth, for sight. O fosterer, O sole Rishi, O
controlling Yama, O Surya, O son of the Father of creatures, marshal and
mass thy rays: the Lustre that is thy most blessed form of all, that I see, He
who is this, this Purusha, He am I.
\par
\PF The kinship in difference of these passages with the imagery and style of
the Veda is evident and the last indeed paraphrases or translates into a later
and more open style a Vedic verse of the Atris:
\par
\BF Hidden by your truth is the Truth that is constant for ever where they
unyoke the horses of the Sun. There the ten thousands stand together, That is
the One: I have seen the supreme Godhead of the embodied gods.
\par
\PF This Vedic and Vedantic imagery is foreign to our present mentality
which does not believe in the living truth of the symbol, because the revealing
imagination intimidated by the intellect has no longer the courage to accept,
identify itself with and boldly embody a psychic and spiritual vision; but it is
certainly very far from being a childish or a primitive and barbarous
mysticism; this vivid, living, luminously poetic intuitive language is rather the
natural expression of a highly evolved spiritual culture.
\par The intuitive thought of the Upanishads starts from this concrete imagery
and these symbols, first to the Vedic Rishis secret seer words wholly
expressive to the mind of the seer but veils of their deepest sense to the
ordinary intelligence, link them to a less covertly expressive language and
pass beyond them to another magnificently open and sublime imagery and
diction which at once reveals the spiritual truth in all its splendour. The prose
Upanishads show us this process of the early mind of India at its work using
the symbol and then passing beyond it to the
Page 336

overt expression of the spiritual significance. A passage of the Prasna
Upanishad on the power and significance of the mystic syllable AUM
illustrates the earlier stage of the process:
\par
\BF This syllable OM, O Satyakama, it is the supreme and it is the lower
Brahman. Therefore the man of knowledge passeth by this house of the
Brahman to the one or the other. And if one meditate on the single letter, he
getteth by it knowledge and soon he attaineth on the earth. And him the Riks
lead to the world of men and there perfected in Tapas and Brahmacharya
and faith he experienceth the greatness of the spirit. Now if by the double
letter he is accomplished in the mind, then is he led up by the Yajus to the
middle world, to the moon-world of Soma. He in the world of Soma
experienceth the majesty of the spirit and returneth again. And he who by the
triple letter again, even this syllable OM, shall meditate on the highest
Purusha, is perfected in the light that is the Sun. As a snake putteth off its
skin, even so is he released from sin and evil and is led by the Samans to the
world of Brahman. He from this dense of living souls seeth the higher than
the highest Purusha who lieth in this mansion. The three letters are afflicted
by death, but now they are used undivided and united to each other, then are
the inner and the outer and the middle action of the spirit made whole in their
perfect using and the spirit knows and is not shaken. This world by the Riks,
the middle world by the Yajus and by the Samans that which the seers make
known to us. The man of knowledge passeth to Him by OM, his house, even
to the supreme spirit that is calm and ageless and fearless and immortal.
\par
\PF The symbols here are still obscure to our intelligence, but indications are
given which show beyond doubt that they are representations of a psychical
experience leading to different states of spiritual realisation and we can see
that these are three, outward, mental and supramental, and as the result of
the last a
Page 337

supreme perfection, a complete and integral action of the whole being in the
tranquil eternity of the immortal Spirit. And later in the Mandukya Upanishad
the other symbols are cast aside and we are admitted to the unveiled
significance. Then there emerges a knowledge to which modern thought is
returning through its own very different intellectual, rational and scientific
method, the knowledge that behind the operations of our outward physical
consciousness are working the operations of another, subliminal,—another
and yet the same,—of which our waking mind is a surface action, and
above—perhaps, we still say—is a spiritual superconscience in which can be
found, it may well be, the highest state and the whole secret of our being. We
shall see, when we look closely at the passage of the Prasna Upanishad, that
this knowledge is already there, and I think we can very rationally conclude
that these and similar utterances of the ancient sages, however perplexing
their form to the rational mind, cannot be dismissed as a childish mysticism,
but are the imaged expression, natural to the mentality of the time, of what
the reason itself by its own processes is now showing us to be true and a
very profound truth and real reality of knowledge.
\par The metrical Upanishads continue this highly charged symbolism but
carry it more lightly and in the bulk of their verses pass beyond this kind of
image to the overt expression. The Self, the Spirit, the Godhead in man and
creatures and Nature and all this world and in other worlds and beyond all
cosmos, the Immortal, the One, the Infinite is hymned without veils in the
splendour of his eternal transcendence and his manifold self-revelation. A
few passages from the teachings of Yama, lord of the Law and of Death, to
Nachiketas, will be enough to illustrate something of their character. \bigskip
\par
\BF OM is this syllable. This syllable is the Brahman, this syllable is the
Supreme. He who knoweth the imperishable OM, whatso he willeth, it is his.
This support is the best, this support is the highest; and when a man knoweth
it, he is greatened in the world of Brahman. The omniscient is not born, nor
dies, nor has he come into being from
Page 338

anywhere, nor is he anyone. He is unborn, he is constant and eternal, he is
the Ancient of Days who is not slain in the slaying of the body.\sdots . . .
\par
He is seated and journeys far, and lying still he goes to every side. Who
other than I should know this ecstatic Godhead? The wise man cometh to
know the great Lord and Self established and bodiless in these bodies that
pass and has grief no longer. This Self is not to be won by teaching nor by
brain-power nor by much learning: he whom the Spirit chooses, by him alone
it can be won, and to him this Spirit discloses its own very body. One who
has not ceased from ill-doing, one who is not concentrated and calm, one
whose mind is not tranquil, shall not get him by the brain's wisdom. He of
whom warriors and sages are the food and death is the spice of his banquet,
who knoweth where is He?\sdots . . .
\par
The Self-born has cloven his doors outward, therefore man sees outward
and not in the inner self: only a wise man here and there turns his eyes
inward, desiring immortality, and looks on the Self face to face. The child
minds follow after surface desires and fall into the net of death which is
spread wide for us; but the wise know of immortality and ask not from things
inconstant that which is constant. One knoweth by this Self form and taste
and odour and touch and its pleasures and what then is here left over? The
wise man cometh to know the great Lord and Self by whom one seeth all
that is in the soul that wakes and all that is in the soul that dreams and hath
grief no longer. He who knoweth the Self, the eater of sweetness close to the
living being, the lord of what was and what will be, shrinks thereafter from
nothing that is. He knoweth him who is that which was born of old from
Tapas and who was born of old from the waters and hath entered in and
standeth in the secret cavern of being with all these creatures. He knoweth
her who is born by the life force, the infinite Mother with all the gods in her,
her who hath entered in and standeth in the
Page 339

secret cavern of being with all these creatures. This is the Fire that hath the
knowledge and it is hidden in the two tinders as the embryo is borne in
pregnant women; this is the Fire that must be adored by men watching
sleeplessly and bringing to him the offering. He is that from which the Sun
rises and that in which it sets: and in him all the gods are founded and none
can pass beyond him. What is here, even that is in other worlds, and what is
there, even according to that is all that is here. He goes from death to death
who sees here only difference. A Purusha no bigger than a thumb stands in
man's central self and is the lord of what was and what shall be, and knowing
him thenceforth one shrinks from nothing that is. A Purusha no bigger than a
man's thumb and he is like a light without smoke; he is the Lord of what was
and what shall be; it is he that is today and it is he that shall be tomorrow.
\bigskip
\par
\PI The Upanishads abound with passages which are at once poetry and
spiritual philosophy, of an absolute clarity and beauty, but no translation empty
of the suggestions and the grave and subtle and luminous sense echoes of the
original words and rhythms can give any idea of their power and perfection.
There are others in which the subtlest psychological and philosophical truths
are expressed with an entire sufficiency without falling short of a perfect
beauty of poetical expression and always so as to live to the mind and soul
and not merely be presented to the understanding intelligence. There is in
some of the prose Upanishads another element of vivid narrative and tradition
which restores for us though only in brief glimpses the picture of that
extraordinary stir and movement of spiritual enquiry and passion for the
highest knowledge which made the Upanishads possible. The scenes of the
old world live before us in a few pages, the sages sitting in their groves ready
to test and teach the comer, princes and learned Brahmins and great landed
nobles going about in search of knowledge, the king's son in his chariot and
the illegitimate son of the servant-girl,
Page 340

seeking any man who might carry in himself the thought of light and the word
of revelation, the typical figures and personalities, Janaka and the subtle mind
of Ajatashatru, Raikwa of the cart, Yajnavalkya militant for truth, calm and
ironic, taking to himself with both hands without attachment worldly
possessions and spiritual riches and casting at last all his wealth behind to
wander forth as a houseless ascetic, Krishna son of Devaki who heard a
single word of the Rishi Ghora and knew at once the Eternal, the ashramas,
the courts of kings who were also spiritual discoverers and thinkers, the great
sacrificial assemblies where the sages met and compared their knowledge.
And we see how the soul of India was born and how arose this great
birth-song in which it soared from its earth into the supreme empyrean of the
spirit. The Vedas and the Upanishads are not only the sufficient
fountain-head of Indian philosophy and religion, but of all Indian art, poetry
and literature. It was the soul, the temperament, the ideal mind formed and
expressed in them which later carved out the great philosophies, built the
structure of the Dharma, recorded its heroic youth in the Mahabharata and
Ramayana, intellectualised indefatigably in the classical times of the ripeness
of its manhood, threw out so many original intuitions in science, created so
rich a glow of aesthetic and vital and sensuous experience, renewed its
spiritual and psychic experience in Tantra and Purana, flung itself into
grandeur and beauty of line and colour, hewed and cast its thought and vision
in stone and bronze, poured itself into new channels of self-expression in the
later tongues and now after eclipse reemerges always the same in difference
and ready for a new life and a new creation.
Page 341

\par
\hn XVIII
\par
\ht Indian Literature–3
\par\drop The Veda is thus the spiritual and psychological seed of Indian
culture and the Upanishads the expression of the truth of highest spiritual
knowledge and experience that has always been the supreme idea of that
culture and the ultimate objective to which it directed the life of the individual
and the aspiration of the soul of the people: and these two great bodies of
sacred writing, its first great efforts of poetic and creative self-expression,
coming into being at a time preceding the later strong and ample and
afterwards rich and curious intellectual development, are conceived and
couched in the language of a purely psychic and spiritual mentality. An
evolution so begun had to proceed by a sort of enriching descent from the
spirit to matter and to pass on first to an intellectual endeavour to see life and
the world and the self in all their relations as they present themselves to the
reasoning and the practical intelligence. The earlier movement of this
intellectual effort was naturally accompanied by a practical development and
organisation of life consciously expressive of the mind and spirit of the
people, the erection of a strong and successful structure of society shaped so
as to fulfil the mundane objects of human existence under the control of a
careful religious, ethical and social order and discipline, but also so as to
provide for the evolution of the soul of man through these things to a spiritual
freedom and perfection. It is this stage of which we get a remarkably ample
and effective representation in the immediately succeeding period of Indian
literary creation.
\par This movement of the Indian mind is represented in its more critical
effort on one side by a strenuous philosophical thinking crystallised into the
great philosophic systems, on the other by an equally insistent endeavour to
formulate in a clear body and with a strict cogency an ethical, social and
political ideal and
Page 342

practice in a consistent and organised system of individual and communal life
and that endeavour resulted in the authoritative social treatises or Shastras of
which the greatest and the most authoritative is the famous Laws of Manu.
The work of the philosophers was to systematise and justify to the reasoning
intelligence the truths of the self and man and the world already discovered
by intuition, revelation and spiritual experience and embodied in the Veda and
the Upanishads, and at the same time to indicate and systematise methods of
discipline founded upon this knowledge by which man might effectuate the
highest aim of his existence. The characteristic form in which this was done
shows the action of the intuitive passing into that of the intellectual mentality
and preserves the stamp and form expressive of its transitional character.
The terse and pregnant phrase of the sacred literature abounding in intuitive
substance is replaced by a still more compact and crowded brief expression,
no longer intuitive and poetic, but severely intellectual,—the expression of a
principle, a whole development of philosophic thought or a logical step
burdened with considerable consequences in a few words, sometimes one or
two, a shortest decisive formula often almost enigmatic in its concentrated
fullness. These Sutras or aphorisms became the basis of ratiocinative
commentaries developing by metaphysical and logical method and with a
considerable variety of interpretation all that was contained at first in the
series of aphoristic formulas. Their concern is solely with original and
ultimate truth and the method of spiritual liberation, \s{mok\,sa}.
\par The work of the social thinkers and legislators was on the contrary
concerned with normal action and practice. It attempted to take up the
ordinary life of man and of the community and the life of human desire and
aim and interest and ordered rule and custom and to interpret and formulate it
in the same complete and decisive manner and at the same time to throw the
whole into an ordered relation to the ruling ideas of the national culture and
frame and perpetuate a social system intelligently fashioned so as to provide
a basis, a structure, a gradation by which there could be a secure evolution of
the life
Page 343

from the vital and mental to the spiritual motive. The leading idea was the
government of human interest and desire by the social and ethical law, the
Dharma, so that it might be made,—all vital, economic, aesthetic, hedonistic,
intellectual and other needs being satisfied duly and according to the right law
of the nature,—a preparation for the spiritual existence. Here too we have as
an initial form the aphoristic method of the Vedic \s{g\,rhya-s\=utras},
afterwards the diffuser, fuller method of the Dharma Shastras,—the first
satisfied with brief indications of simple and essential socio-religious principle
and practice, the later work attempting to cover the whole life of the
individual, the class and the people. The very character of the effort and its
thoroughness and the constant unity of idea that reigns through the whole of it
are a remarkable evidence of a very developed intellectual, aesthetic and
ethical consciousness and a high turn and capacity for a noble and ordered
civilisation and culture. The intelligence at work, the understanding and
formative power manifested is not inferior to that of any ancient or modern
people, and there is a gravity, a unified clarity and nobility of conception
which balances at least in any true idea of culture the greater suppleness,
more well-informed experience and science and eager flexibility of
experimental hardihood which are the gains that distinguish our later
humanity. At any rate it was no barbaric mind that was thus intently careful
for a fine and well unified order of society, a high and clear thought to govern
it and at the end of life a great spiritual perfection and release.
\par The pure literature of the period is represented by the two great epics,
the Mahabharata, which gathered into its vast structure the greater part of
the poetic activity of the Indian mind during several centuries, and the
Ramayana. These two poems are epical in their motive and spirit, but they
are not like any other two epics in the world, but are entirely of their own
kind and subtly different from others in their principle. It is not only that
although they contain an early heroic story and a transmutation of many
primitive elements, their form belongs to a period of highly developed
intellectual, ethical and social culture, is enriched with a body of mature
thought and uplifted
Page 344

by a ripe nobility and refined gravity of ethical tone and therefore these
poems are quite different from primitive edda and saga and greater in breadth
of view and substance and height of motive—I do not speak now of aesthetic
quality and poetic perfection—than the Homeric poems, while at the same
time there is still an early breath, a direct and straightforward vigour, a
freshness and greatness and pulse of life, a simplicity of strength and beauty
that makes of them quite another kind than the elaborately constructed
literary epics of Virgil or Milton, Firdausi or Kalidasa. This peculiar blending
of the natural breath of an early, heroic, swift and vigorous force of life with
a strong development and activity of the ethical, the intellectual, even the
philosophic mind is indeed a remarkable feature; these poems are the voice
of the youth of a people, but a youth not only fresh and fine and buoyant, but
also great and accomplished, wise and noble. This however is only a
temperamental distinction: there is another that is more far-reaching, a
difference in the whole conception, function and structure.
\par One of the elements of the old Vedic education was a knowledge of
significant tradition, Itihasa, and it is this word that was used by the ancient
critics to distinguish the Mahabharata and the Ramayana from the later
literary epics. The Itihasa was an ancient historical or legendary tradition
turned to creative use as a significant mythus or tale expressive of some
spiritual or religious or ethical or ideal meaning and thus formative of the mind
of the people. The Mahabharata and Ramayana are Itihasas of this kind on a
large scale and with a massive purpose. The poets who wrote and those who
added to these great bodies of poetic writing did not intend merely to tell an
ancient tale in a beautiful or noble manner or even to fashion a poem
pregnant with much richness of interest and meaning, though they did both
these things with a high success; they wrote with a sense of their function as
architects and sculptors of life, creative exponents, fashioners of significant
forms of the national thought and religion and ethics and culture. A profound
stress of thought on life, a large and vital view of religion and society, a
certain strain of philosophic idea runs through these poems
Page 345

and the whole ancient culture of India is embodied in them with a great force
of intellectual conception and living presentation. The Mahabharata has been
spoken of as a fifth Veda, it has been said of both these poems that they are
not only great poems but Dharmashastras, the body of a large religious and
ethical and social and political teaching, and their effect and hold on the mind
and life of the people have been so great that they have been described as
the bible of the Indian people. That is not quite an accurate analogy, for the
bible of the Indian people contains also the Veda and Upanishads, the Purana
and Tantras and the Dharmashastras, not to speak of a large bulk of the
religious poetry in the regional languages. The work of these epics was to
popularise high philosophic and ethical idea and cultural practice; it was to
throw out prominently and with a seizing relief and effect in a frame of great
poetry and on a background of poetic story and around significant
personalities that became to the people abiding national memories and
representative figures all that was best in the soul and thought or true to the
life or real to the creative imagination and ideal mind or characteristic and
illuminative of the social, ethical, political and religious culture of India. All
these things were brought together and disposed with artistic power and a
telling effect in a poetic body given to traditions half legendary, half historic
but cherished henceforth as deepest and most living truth and as a part of
their religion by the people. Thus framed the Mahabharata and Ramayana,
whether in the original Sanskrit or rewritten in the regional tongues, brought
to the masses by Kathakas,—rhapsodists, reciters and exegetes,—became
and remained one of the chief instruments of popular education and culture,
moulded the thought, character, aesthetic and religious mind of the people and
gave even to the illiterate some sufficient tincture of philosophy, ethics, social
and political ideas, aesthetic emotion, poetry, fiction and romance. That which
was for the cultured classes contained in Veda and Upanishad, shut into
profound philosophical aphorism and treatise or inculcated in dharma-shastra
and artha-shastra, was put here into creative and living figures, associated
with familiar story and legend,
Page 346

fused into a vivid representation of life and thus made a near and living power
that all could readily assimilate through the poetic word appealing at once to
the soul and the imagination and the intelligence.
\par The Mahabharata especially is not only the story of the Bharatas, the
epic of an early event which had become a national tradition but on a vast
scale the epic of the soul and religious and ethical mind and social and
political ideals and culture and life of India. It is said popularly of it and with a
certain measure of truth that whatever is in India is in the Mahabharata. The
Mahabharata is the creation and expression not of a single individual mind,
but of the mind of a nation; it is the poem of itself written by a whole people.
It would be vain to apply to it the canons of a poetical art applicable to an
epic poem with a smaller and more restricted purpose, but still a great and
quite conscious art has been expended both on its detail and its total
structure. The whole poem has been built like a vast national temple unrolling
slowly its immense and complex idea from chamber to chamber, crowded
with significant groups and sculptures and inscriptions, the grouped figures
carved in divine or semi-divine proportions, a humanity aggrandised and half
uplifted to superhumanity and yet always true to the human motive and idea
and feeling, the strain of the real constantly raised by the tones of the ideal,
the life of this world amply portrayed but subjected to the conscious influence
and presence of the powers of the worlds behind it, and the whole unified by
the long embodied procession of a consistent idea worked out in the wide
steps of the poetic story. As is needed in an epic narrative, the conduct of the
story is the main interest of the poem and it is carried through with an at once
large and minute movement, wide and bold in the mass, striking and effective
in detail, always simple, strong and epic in its style and pace. At the same
time though supremely interesting in substance and vivid in the manner of the
telling as a poetic story, it is something more,—a significant tale, Itihasa,
representative throughout of the central ideas and ideals of Indian life and
culture. The leading motive is the Indian idea of the Dharma. Here the Vedic
notion of the struggle between the
Page 347

godheads of truth and light and unity and the powers of darkness and division
and falsehood is brought out from the spiritual and religious and internal into
the outer intellectual, ethical and vital plane. It takes there in the figure of the
story a double form of a personal and a political struggle, the personal a
conflict between typical and representative personalities embodying the
greater ethical ideals of the Indian Dharma and others who are embodiments
of Asuric egoism and self-will and misuse of the Dharma, the political a battle
in which the personal struggle culminates, an international clash ending in the
establishment of a new rule of righteousness and justice, a kingdom or rather
an empire of the Dharma uniting warring races and substituting for the
ambitious arrogance of kings and aristocratic clans the supremacy, the calm
and peace of a just and humane empire. It is the old struggle of Deva and
Asura, God and Titan, but represented in the terms of human life.
\par The way in which this double form is worked out and the presentation of
the movement of individual lives and of the national life first as their
background and then as coming into the front in a movement of kingdoms and
armies and nations show a high architectonic faculty akin in the sphere of
poetry to that which laboured in Indian architecture, and the whole has been
conducted with a large poetic art and vision. There is the same power to
embrace great spaces in a total view and the same tendency to fill them with
an abundance of minute, effective, vivid and significant detail. There is
brought too into the frame of the narrative a very considerable element of
other tales, legends, episodes, most of them of a significant character suitable
to the method of Itihasa, and an extraordinary amount of philosophical,
religious, ethical, social and political thinking sometimes direct, sometimes
cast into the form of the legend and episode. The ideas of the Upanishads
and of the great philosophies are brought in continually and sometimes given
new developments, as in the Gita; religious myth and tale and idea and
teaching are made part of the tissue; the ethical ideals of the race are
expressed or are transmuted into the shape of tale and episode as well as
embodied in the figures of the story,
Page 348

political and social ideals and institutions are similarly developed or illustrated
with a high vividness and clearness and space is found too for aesthetic and
other suggestions connected with the life of the people. All these things are
interwoven into the epic narrative with a remarkable skill and closeness. The
irregularities inevitable in so combined and difficult a plan and in a work to
which many poets of an unequal power have contributed fall into their place
in the general massive complexity of the scheme and assist rather than break
the total impression. The whole is a poetic expression unique in its power and
fullness of the entire soul and thought and life of a people.
\par The Ramayana is a work of the same essential kind as the
Mahabharata; it differs only by a greater simplicity of plan, a more delicate
ideal temperament and a finer glow of poetic warmth and colour. The main
bulk of the poem in spite of much accretion is evidently by a single hand and
has a less complex and more obvious unity of structure. There is less of the
philosophic, more of the purely poetic mind, more of the artist, less of the
builder. The whole story is from beginning to end of one piece and there is no
deviation from the stream of the narrative. At the same time there is a like
vastness of vision, an even more wide-winged flight of epic sublimity in the
conception and sustained richness of minute execution in the detail. The
structural power, strong workmanship and method of disposition of the
Mahabharata remind one of the art of the Indian builders, the grandeur and
boldness of outline and wealth of colour and minute decorative execution of
the Ramayana suggest rather a transcript into literature of the spirit and style
of Indian painting. The epic poet has taken here also as his subject an Itihasa,
an ancient tale or legend associated with an old Indian dynasty and filled it in
with detail from myth and folklore, but has exalted all into a scale of
grandiose epic figure that it may bear more worthily the high intention and
significance. The subject is the same as in the Mahabharata, the strife of the
divine with the titanic forces in the life of the earth, but in more purely ideal
forms, in frankly supernatural dimensions and an imaginative heightening of
both the good and the evil in human
Page 349

character. On one side is portrayed an ideal manhood, a divine beauty of
virtue and ethical order, a civilization founded on the Dharma and realising an
exaltation of the moral ideal which is presented with a singularly strong
appeal of aesthetic grace and harmony and sweetness; on the other are wild
and anarchic and almost amorphous forces of superhuman egoism and
self-will and exultant violence, and the two ideas and powers of mental
nature living and embodied are brought into conflict and led to a decisive
issue of the victory of the divine man over the Rakshasa. All shade and
complexity are omitted which would diminish the single purity of the idea, the
representative force in the outline of the figures, the significance of the
temperamental colour and only so much admitted as is sufficient to humanise
the appeal and the significance. The poet makes us conscious of the immense
forces that are behind our life and sets his action in a magnificent epic
scenery, the great imperial city, the mountains and the ocean, the forest and
wilderness, described with such a largeness as to make us feel as if the
whole world were the scene of his poem and its subject the whole divine and
titanic possibility of man imaged in a few great or monstrous figures. The
ethical and the aesthetic mind of India have here fused themselves into a
harmonious unity and reached an unexampled pure wideness and beauty of
self-expression. The Ramayana embodied for the Indian imagination its
highest and tenderest human ideals of character, made strength and courage
and gentleness and purity and fidelity and self-sacrifice familiar to it in the
suavest and most harmonious forms coloured so as to attract the emotion and
the aesthetic sense, stripped morals of all repellent austerity on one side or on
the other of mere commonness and lent a certain high divineness to the
ordinary things of life, conjugal and filial and maternal and fraternal feeling,
the duty of the prince and leader and the loyalty of follower and subject, the
greatness of the great and the truth and worth of the simple, toning things
ethical to the beauty of a more psychical meaning by the glow of its ideal
hues. The work of Valmiki has been an agent of almost incalculable power in
the moulding of the cultural mind of India: it has presented to it to be loved
and imitated in figures
Page 350

like Rama and Sita, made so divinely and with such a revelation of reality as
to become objects of enduring cult and worship, or like Hanuman,
Lakshmana, Bharata the living human image of its ethical ideals; it has
fashioned much of what is best and sweetest in the national character, and it
has evoked and fixed in it those finer and exquisite yet firm soul tones and
that more delicate humanity of temperament which are a more valuable thing
than the formal outsides of virtue and conduct.
\par The poetical manner of these epics is not inferior to the greatness of
their substance. The style and the verse in which they are written have
always a noble epic quality, a lucid classical simplicity and directness rich in
expression but stripped of superfluous ornament, a swift, vigorous, flexible
and fluid verse constantly sure of the epic cadence. There is a difference in
the temperament of the language. The characteristic diction of the
Mahabharata is almost austerely masculine, trusting to force of sense and
inspired accuracy of turn, almost ascetic in its simplicity and directness and a
frequent fine and happy bareness; it is the speech of a strong and rapid
poetical intelligence and a great and straightforward vital force, brief and
telling in phrase but by virtue of a single-minded sincerity and, except in some
knotted passages or episodes, without any rhetorical labour of compactness, a
style like the light and strong body of a runner nude and pure and healthily
lustrous and clear without superfluity of flesh or exaggeration of muscle, agile
and swift and untired in the race. There is inevitably much in this vast poem
that is in an inferior manner, but little or nothing that falls below a certain
sustained level in which there is always something of this virtue. The diction
of the Ramayana is shaped in a more attractive mould, a marvel of
sweetness and strength, lucidity and warmth and grace; its phrase has not
only poetic truth and epic force and diction but a constant intimate vibration
of the feeling of the idea, emotion or object: there is an element of fine ideal
delicacy in its sustained strength and breath of power. In both poems it is a
high poetic soul and inspired intelligence that is at work; the directly intuitive
mind of the Veda and Upanishads has
Page 351

\NH retired behind the veil of the intellectual and outwardly psychical \NH
imagination.
\par This is the character of the epics and the qualities which have made
them immortal, cherished among India's greatest literary and cultural
treasures, and given them their enduring power over the national mind. Apart
from minor defects and inequalities such as we find in all works set at this
pitch and involving a considerable length of labour, the objections made by
Western criticism are simply expressions of a difference of mentality and
aesthetic taste. The vastness of the plan and the leisurely minuteness of detail
are baffling and tiring to a Western mind accustomed to smaller limits, a more
easily fatigued eye and imagination and a hastier pace of life, but they are
congenial to the spaciousness of vision and intent curiosity of circumstance,
characteristic of the Indian mind, that spring as I have pointed out in relation
to architecture from the habit of the cosmic consciousness and its sight and
imagination and activity of experience. Another difference is that the
terrestrial life is not seen realistically just as it is to the physical mind but
constantly in relation to the much that is behind it, the human action is
surrounded and influenced by great powers and forces, Daivic, Asuric and
Rakshasic, and the greater human figures are a kind of incarnation of these
more cosmic personalities and powers. The objection that the individual
thereby loses his individual interest and becomes a puppet of impersonal
forces is not true either in reality or actually in the imaginative figures of this
literature, for there we see that the personages gain by it in greatness and
force of action and are only ennobled by an impersonality that raises and
heightens the play of their personality. The mingling of terrestrial nature and
supernature, not as a mere imagination but with an entire sincerity and
naturalness, is due to the same conception of a greater reality in life, and it is
as significant figures of this greater reality that we must regard much to
which the realistic critic objects with an absurdly misplaced violence, such as
the powers gained by Tapasya, the use of divine weapons, the frequent
indications of psychic action and influence. The complaint of exaggeration is
equally invalid
Page 352

where the whole action is that of men raised beyond the usual human level,
since we can only ask for proportions consonant with the truth of the stature
of life conceived in the imagination of the poet and cannot insist on an
unimaginative fidelity to the ordinary measures which would here be false
because wholly out of place. The complaint of lifelessness and want of
personality in the epic characters is equally unfounded: Rama and Sita,
Arjuna and Yudhisthira, Bhishma and Duryodhana and Karna are intensely
real and human and alive to the Indian mind. Only the main insistence, here
as in Indian art, is not on the outward saliences of character, for these are
only used secondarily as aids to the presentation, but on the soul life and the
inner soul quality presented with as absolute a vividness and strength and
purity of outline as possible. The idealism of characters like Rama and Sita is
no pale and vapid unreality; they are vivid with the truth of the ideal life, of
the greatness that man may be and does become when he gives his soul a
chance and it is no sound objection that there is only a small allowance of the
broken littleness of our ordinary nature.
\par These epics are therefore not a mere mass of untransmuted legend and
folklore, as is ignorantly objected, but a highly artistic representation of
intimate significances of life, the living presentment of a strong and noble
thinking, a developed ethical and aesthetic mind and a high social and political
ideal, the ensouled image of a great culture. As rich in freshness of life but
immeasurably more profound and evolved in thought and substance than the
Greek, as advanced in maturity of culture but more vigorous and vital and
young in strength than the Latin epic poetry, the Indian epic poems were
fashioned to serve a greater and completer national and cultural function and
that they should have been received and absorbed by both the high and the
low, the cultured and the masses and remained through twenty centuries an
intimate and formative part of the life of the whole nation is of itself the
strongest possible evidence of the greatness and fineness of this ancient
Indian culture.
Page 353

\par
\hn XIX
\par
\ht Indian Literature–4
\par\drop The classical age of the ancient literature, the best known and
appraised of all, covers a period of some ten centuries and possibly more, and
it is marked off from the earlier writings by a considerable difference, not so
much in substance, as in the moulding and the colour of its thought,
temperament and language. The divine childhood, the heroic youth, the bright
and strong early manhood of the people and its culture are over and there is
instead a long and opulent maturity and as its sequence an equally opulent
and richly coloured decline. The decline is not to death, for it is followed by a
certain rejuvenescence, a fresh start and repeated beginning, of which the
medium is no longer Sanskrit but the derived languages, the daughters of the
dialects raised into literary instruments and developing as the grand and
ancient tongue loses its last forces and inspiring life. The difference in spirit
and mould between the epics and the speech of Bhartrihari and Kalidasa is
already enormous and may possibly be explained by the early centuries of
Buddhism when Sanskrit ceased to be the sole literary tongue understood and
spoken by all educated men and Pali came up as its successful rival and the
means of expression for at least a great part of the current of the national
thought and life. The language and movement of the epics have all the vigour,
freedom, spontaneous force and appeal of a speech that leaps straight from
the founts of life; the speech of Kalidasa is an accomplished art, an
intellectual and aesthetic creation consummate, deliberate, finely ornate,
carved like a statue, coloured like a painting, not yet artificial, though there is
a masterly artifice and device, but still a careful work of art laboured by the
intelligence. It is carefully natural, not with the spontaneous ease of a first,
but the accomplished air of ease of a habitual second nature. The elements of
artifice and device increase and
Page 354

predominate in the later writers, their language is a laborious and deliberate
though a powerful and beautiful construction and appeals only to an erudite
audience, a learned elite. The religious writings, Purana and Tantra, moving
from a deeper, still intensely living source, aiming by their simplicity at a
wider appeal, prolong for a time the tradition of the epics, but the simplicity
and directness is willed rather than the earlier natural ease. In the end
Sanskrit becomes the language of the Pundits and except for certain
philosophical, religious and learned purposes no longer a first-hand expression
of the life and mind of the people.
\par The alteration in the literary speech corresponds however, apart from all
inducing circumstances, to a great change in the centre of mentality of the
culture. It is still and always spiritual, philosophical, religious, ethical, but the
inner austerer things seem to draw back a little and to stand in the
background, acknowledged indeed and overshadowing the rest, but
nevertheless a little detaching themselves from them and allowing them to act
for their own enlargement and profit. The exterior powers that stand out in
front are the curious intellect, the vital urge, the aesthetic, urbanely active and
hedonistic sense life. It is the great period of logical philosophy, of science, of
art and the developed crafts, law, politics, trade, colonisation, the great
kingdoms and empires with their ordered and elaborate administrations, the
minute rule of the Shastras in all departments of thought and life, an
enjoyment of all that is brilliant, sensuous, agreeable, a discussion of all that
could be thought and known, a fixing and systemising of all that could be
brought into the compass of intelligence and practice,—the most splendid,
sumptuous and imposing millennium of Indian culture.
\par The intellectuality that predominates is not in any way restless, sceptical
or negative, but it is enormously inquiring and active, accepting the great lines
of spiritual, religious, philosophical and social truth that had been discovered
and laid down by the past, but eager too to develop, to complete, to know
minutely and thoroughly and fix in perfectly established system and detail, to
work out all possible branches and ramifications,
Page 355

to fill the intelligence, the sense and the life. The grand basic principles and
lines of Indian religion, philosophy, society have already been found and built
and the steps of the culture move now in the magnitude and satisfying
security of a great tradition; but there is still ample room for creation and
discovery within these fields and a much wider province, great beginnings,
strong developments of science and art and literature, the freedom of the
purely intellectual and aesthetic activities, much scope too for the hedonisms
of the vital and the refinements of the emotional being, a cultivation of the art
and rhythmic practice of life. There is a highly intellectualised vital stress and
a many-sided interest in living, an indulgence of an at once intellectual and
vital and sensuous satisfaction extending even to a frankness of physical and
sensual experience, but in the manner of the oriental mind with a certain
decorousness and order, an element of aesthetic restraint and the observance
of rule and measure even in indulgence that saves always from the unbridled
licence to which less disciplined races are liable. The characteristic, the
central action is the play of the intellectual mind and everywhere that
predominates. In the earlier age the many strands of the Indian mind and life
principle are unified and inseparable, a single wide movement set to a strong
and abundant but simple music; here they seem to stand side by side related
and harmonised, curious and complex, multiply one. The spontaneous unity of
the intuitive mind is replaced by the artificial unity of the analysing and
synthetising intelligence. Art and religion still continue the predominance of
the spiritual and intuitive motive, but it is less to the front in literature. A
division has been settled between religious and secular writing that did not
exist to any appreciable extent in the previous ages. The great poets and
writers are secular creators and their works have no chance of forming part
of the intimate religious and ethical mind of the people as did the Ramayana
and Mahabharata. The stream of religious poetry flows separately in Purana
and Tantra.
\par The great representative poet of this age is Kalidasa. He establishes a
type which was preparing before and endured after him with more or less of
additional decoration, but substantially
Page 356

unchanged through the centuries. His poems are the perfect and
harmoniously designed model of a kind and substance that others cast always
into similar forms but with a genius inferior in power or less rhythmically
balanced, faultless and whole. The art of poetic speech in Kalidasa's period
reaches an extraordinary perfection. Poetry itself had become a high craft,
conscious of its means, meticulously conscientious in the use of its
instruments, as alert and exact in its technique as architecture, painting and
sculpture, vigilant to equate beauty and power of the form with nobility and
richness of the conception, aim and spirit and the scrupulous completeness of
its execution with fullness of aesthetic vision or of the emotional or sensuous
appeal. There was established here as in the other arts and indeed during all
this era in all human activities a Shastra, a well recognised and carefully
practised science and art of poetics, critical and formulative of all that makes
perfection of method and prescriptive of things to be avoided, curious of
essentials and possibilities but under a regime of standards and limits
conceived with the aim of excluding all fault of excess or of defect and
therefore in practice as unfavourable to any creative lawlessness, even
though the poet's native right of fantasy and freedom is theoretically admitted,
as to any least tendency towards bad or careless, hasty or irregular
workmanship. The poet is expected to be thoroughly conscious of his art, as
minutely acquainted with its conditions and its fixed and certain standard and
method as the painter and sculptor and to govern by his critical sense and
knowledge the flight of his genius. This careful art of poetry became in the
end too much of a rigid tradition, too appreciative of rhetorical device and
artifice and even permitted and admired the most extraordinary contortions of
the learned intelligence, as in the Alexandrian decline of Greek poetry, but the
earlier work is usually free from these shortcomings or they are only
occasional and rare.
\par The classical Sanskrit is perhaps the most remarkably finished and
capable instrument of thought yet fashioned, at any rate by either the Aryan
or the Semitic mind, lucid with the utmost possible clarity, precise to the
farthest limit of precision, always compact and at its best sparing in its
formation of phrase,
Page 357

but yet with all this never poor or bare: there is no sacrifice of depth to
lucidity, but rather a pregnant opulence of meaning, a capacity of high
richness and beauty, a natural grandeur of sound and diction inherited from
the ancient days. The abuse of the faculty of compound structure proved
fatal later on to the prose, but in the earlier prose and poetry where it is
limited, there is an air of continent abundance strengthened by restraint and
all the more capable of making the most of its resources. The great and
subtle and musical rhythms of the classical poetry with their imaginative,
attractive and beautiful names, manifold in capacity, careful in structure, are
of themselves a mould that insists on perfection and hardly admits the
possibility of a mean or slovenly workmanship or a defective movement. The
unit of this poetical art is the \s{\'sloka}, the sufficient verse of four quarters or
\s{p\=adas}, and each \s{\'sloka} is expected to be a work of perfect art in
itself, a harmonious, vivid and convincing expression of an object, scene,
detail, thought, sentiment, state of mind or emotion that can stand by itself as
an independent figure; the succession of \s{\'slokas} must be a constant
development by addition of completeness to completeness and the whole
poem or canto of a long poem an artistic and satisfying structure in this
manner, the succession of cantos a progression of definite movements
building a total harmony. It is this carefully artistic and highly cultured type of
poetic creation that reached its acme of perfection in the poetry of Kalidasa.
\par This preeminence proceeds from two qualities possessed in a degree
only to be paralleled in the work of the greatest world-poets and not always
combined in them in so equable a harmony and with so adequate a
combination of execution and substance. Kalidasa ranks among the supreme
poetic artists with Milton and Virgil and he has a more subtle and delicate
spirit and touch in his art than the English, a greater breath of native power
informing and vivifying his execution than the Latin poet. There is no more
perfect and harmonious style in literature, no more inspired and careful
master of the absolutely harmonious and sufficient phrase combining the
minimum of word expenditure with the fullest sense of an accomplished ease
Page 358

and a divine elegance and not excluding a fine excess that is not excessive,
an utmost possible refined opulence of aesthetic value. More perfectly than
any other he realises the artistic combination of a harmonious economy of
expression, not a word, syllable, sound in superfluity, and a total sense of wise
and lavish opulence that was the aim of the earlier classical poets. None so
divinely skilful as he in imparting without any overdoing the richest colour,
charm, appeal and value, greatness or nobility or power or suavity and always
some kind and the right kind and the fullest degree of beauty to each line and
each phrase. The felicity of selection is equalled by the felicity of
combination. One of the most splendidly sensuous of poets in the higher
sense of that epithet because he has a vivid vision and feeling of his object,
his sensuousness is neither lax nor overpowering, but always satisfying and
just, because it is united with a plenary force of the intelligence, a gravity and
strength sometimes apparent, sometimes disguised in beauty but appreciable
within the broidered and coloured robe, a royal restraint in the heart of the
regal indulgence. And Kalidasa's sovereign mastery of rhythm is as great as
his sovereign mastery of phrase. Here we meet in each metrical kind with
the most perfect discoveries of verbal harmony in the Sanskrit language (pure
lyrical melody comes only afterwards at the end in one or two poets like
Jayadeva), harmonies founded on a constant subtle complexity of the fine
assonances of sound and an unobtrusive use of significant cadence that never
breaks the fluent unity of tone of the music. And the other quality of
Kalidasa's poetry is the unfailing adequacy of the substance. Careful always
to get the full aesthetic value of the word and sound clothing his thought and
substance, he is equally careful that the thought and the substance itself
should be of a high, strong or rich intellectual, descriptive or emotional value.
His conception is large in its view though it has not the cosmic breadth of the
earlier poets and it is sustained at every step in its execution. The hand of the
artist never fails in the management of its material,—exception being made of
a fault of composition marring one, the least considerable of his works,—and
his
Page 359

imagination is always as equal to its task as his touch is great and subtle.
\par The work to which these supreme poetic qualities were brought was
very much the same at bottom, though differing in its form and method, as
that achieved by the earlier epics; it was to interpret in poetic speech and
represent in significant images and figures the mind, the life, the culture of
India in his age. Kalidasa's seven extant poems, each in its own way and
within its limits and on its level a masterpiece, are a brilliant and delicately
ornate roll of pictures and inscriptions with that as their single real subject.
His was a richly stored mind, the mind at once of a scholar and observer
possessed of all the learning of his time, versed in the politics, law, social idea,
system and detail, religion, mythology, philosophy, art of his time, intimate
with the life of courts and familiar with the life of the people, widely and very
minutely observant of the life of Nature, of bird and beast, season and tree
and flower, all the lore of the mind and all the lore of the eye; and this mind
was at the same time always that of a great poet and artist. There is not in
his work the touch of pedantry or excessive learning that mars the art of
some other Sanskrit poets, he knows how to subdue all his matter to the spirit
of his art and to make the scholar and observer no more than a gatherer of
materials for the poet, but the richness of documentation is there ready and
available and constantly brought in as part of incident and description and
surrounding idea and forms or intervenes in the brilliant series of images that
pass before us in the long succession of magnificent couplets and stanzas.
India, her great mountains and forests and plains and their peoples, her men
and women and the circumstances of their life, her animals, her cities and
villages, her hermitages, rivers, gardens and tilled lands are the background of
narrative and drama and love poem. He has seen it all and filled his mind with
it and never fails to bring it before us vivid with all the wealth of description
of which he is capable. Her ethical and domestic ideals, the life of the ascetic
in the forest or engaged in meditation and austerity upon the mountains and
the life of the householder, her familiar customs and social standards and
Page 360

observances, her religious notions, cult, symbols give the rest of the
surroundings and the atmosphere. The high actions of gods and kings, the
nobler or the more delicate human sentiments, the charm and beauty of
women, the sensuous passion of lovers, the procession of the seasons and the
scenes of Nature, these are his favourite subjects.
\par He is a true son of his age in his dwelling on the artistic, hedonistic,
sensuous sides of experience and preeminently a poet of love and beauty and
the joy of life. He represents it also in his intellectual passion for higher
things, his intense appreciation of knowledge, culture, the religious idea, the
ethical ideal, the greatness of ascetic self-mastery, and these too he makes a
part of the beauty and interest of life and sees as admirable elements of its
complete and splendid picture. All his work is of this tissue. His great literary
epic, the “House of Raghu”, treats the story of a line of ancient kings as
representative of the highest religious and ethical culture and ideals of the
race and brings out its significances environed with a splendid decoration of
almost pictorially depicted sentiment and action, noble or beautiful thought
and speech and vivid incident and scene and surrounding. Another unfinished
epic, a great fragment but by the virtue of his method of work complete in
itself so far as the tale proceeds, is in subject a legend of the gods, the
ancient subject of a strife of Gods and Titans, the solution prepared here by a
union of the supreme God and the Goddess, but in treatment it is a description
of Nature and the human life of India raised to a divine magnitude on the
sacred mountain and in the homes of the high deities. His three dramas move
around the passion of love, but with the same insistence on the detail and
picture of life. One poem unrolls the hued series of the seasons of the Indian
year. Another leads the messenger cloud across northern India viewing as it
passes the panorama of her scenes and closes on a vivid and delicately
sensuous and emotional portrayal of the passion of love. In these varied
settings we get a singularly complete impression of the mind, the tradition, the
sentiment, the rich, beautiful and ordered life of the India of the times, not in
its very deepest things, for these have to be sought elsewhere,
Page 361

but in what was for the time most characteristic, the intellectual, vital and
artistic turn of that period of her culture.
\par The rest of the poetry of the times is of one fundamental type with
Kalidasa's; for it has with individual variations the same thought mind,
temperament, general materials, poetic method, and much of it has a high
genius or an unusual quality and distinction though not the same perfection,
beauty and felicity. The literary epics of Bharavi and Magha reveal the
beginning of the decline marked by the progressive encroachment of a
rhetorical and laborious standard of form, method and manner that heavily
burdens and is bound eventually to stifle the poetic spirit, an increasing
artificiality of tradition and convention and gross faults of taste that bear
evidence of the approaching transmission of the language out of the hands of
the literary creator into the control of the Pundit and pedant. Magha's poem is
more constructed by rule of rhetoric than created and he displays as merits
the very worst puerilities of melodious jingle, intricate acrostic and laborious
double meaning. Bharavi is less attainted by the decadence, but not immune,
and he suffers himself to be betrayed by its influence to much that is neither
suitable to his temperament and genius nor in itself beautiful or true.
Nevertheless Bharavi has high qualities of grave poetic thinking and epic
sublimity of description and Magha poetic gifts that would have secured for
him a more considerable place in literature if the poet had not been crossed
with a pedant. In this mixture of genius with defect of taste and manner the
later classical poets resemble the Elizabethans with the difference that in one
case the incoherence is the result of a crude and still unripe, in the other of an
overripe and decadent culture. At the same time they bring out very
prominently the character of this age of Sanskrit literature, its qualities but
also its limitations that escape the eye in Kalidasa and are hidden in the
splendour of his genius.
\par This poetry is preeminently a ripe and deliberate poetic representation
and criticism of thought and life and the things that traditionally interested an
aristocratic and cultured class in a very advanced and intellectual period of
civilisation. The intellect predominates everywhere and, even when it seems
to
Page 362

stand aside and leave room for pure objective presentation, it puts on that too
the stamp of its image. In the earlier epics the thought, religion, ethics, life
movements are all strongly lived; the poetic intelligence is at work but always
absorbed in its work, self-forgetful and identified with its object, and it is this
that is the secret of their great creative force and living poetic sincerity and
power. The later poets are interested in the same things but with an intensely
reflective experience and critical intelligence that always observes more than
it lives with its objects. In the literary epics there is no real movement of life,
but only a close brilliant description of life. The poet makes to pass before us
a series of pictured incidents, scenes, details, figures, attitudes richly coloured,
exact, vivid, convincing to the eye and attractive, but in spite of the charm
and interest we speedily perceive that these are only animated pictures.
Things are indeed seen vividly but with the more outer eye of the imagination,
observed by the intellect, reproduced by the sensuous imagination of the poet,
but they have not been deeply lived in the spirit. Kalidasa alone is immune
from this deficiency of the method because there is in him a great thinking,
imaginative, sensuous poetic soul that has lived and creates what he pictures
and does not merely fabricate brilliant scenes and figures. The rest only
occasionally rise above the deficiency and do then great and not only brilliant
or effective work. Their ordinary work is so well done as to deserve great
and unstinted praise for what it possesses, but not the highest praise. It is in
the end more decorative than creative. There ensues from the character of
this poetic method a spiritual consequence, that we see here very vividly the
current thought, ethics, aesthetic culture, active and sense life of
contemporary India, but not the deeper soul of these things so much as their
outer character and body. There is much ethical and religious thought of a
sufficiently high ideal kind, and it is quite sincere but only intellectually
sincere, and therefore there is no impression of the deeper religious feeling or
the living ethical power that we get in the Mahabharata and Ramayana and in
most of the art and literature of India. The ascetic life is depicted, but only in
its ideas and outward figure:
Page 363

the sensuous life is depicted in the same scrupulous manner—it is intensely
observed and appreciated and well reproduced to the eye and the intelligence,
but not intensely felt and created in the soul of the poet. The intellect has
become too detached and too critically observant to live things with the
natural force of the life or with the intuitive identity. This is the quality and
also the malady of an overdeveloped intellectualism and it has always been
the forerunner of a decadence.
\par The predominantly intellectual turn appears in the abundance of another
kind of writing, the gnomic verse, \s{subh\=a\,sita}. This is the use of the
independent completeness of the \s{\'sloka} to be the body in its single
sufficiency of the concentrated essence and expression of a thought, an
aper\c{c}u or significant incident of life, a sentiment so expressed as to convey
its essential idea to the intelligence. There is a great plenty of this kind of
work admirably done; for it was congenial to the keen intellect and the wide,
mature and well-stored experience of the age: but in the work of Bhartrihari
it assumes the proportions of genius, because he writes not only with the
thought but with emotion, with what might be called a moved intellectuality of
the feeling and an intimate experience that gives great potency and
sometimes poignancy to his utterance. There are three centuries or
\s{\'satakas} of his sentences, the first expressing high ethical thought or
worldly wisdom or brief criticisms of aspects of life, the second concerned
with erotic passion, much less effective because it is the fruit of curiosity and
the environment rather than the poet's own temperament and genius, and the
third proclaiming an ascetic weariness and recoil from the world.
Bhartrihari's triple work is significant of the three leading motives of the mind
of the age, its reflective interest in life and turn for high and strong and
minute thinking, its preoccupation with the enjoyment of the senses, and its
ascetic spiritual turn—the end of the one and the ransom of the other. It is
significant too by the character of this spirituality; it is no longer the great
natural flight of the spirit to the fullness of its own high domain, but rather a
turning away of the intellect and the senses wearied of themselves and life,
unable to find there the
Page 364

\NH satisfaction they sought, to find peace in a spiritual passivity in which the
tired thought and sense could find their absolute rest and cessation.
\par The drama however is the most attractive though not therefore the
greatest product of the poetical mind of the age. There its excessive
intellectuality was compelled by the necessities of dramatic poetry to be more
closely and creatively identified with the very mould and movement of life.
The Sanskrit drama type is a beautiful form and it has been used in most of
the plays that have come down to us with an accomplished art and a true
creative faculty. At the same time it is true that it does not rise to the
greatnesses of the Greek or the Shakespearian drama. This is not due to the
elimination of tragedy,—for there can be dramatic creation of the greatest
kind without a solution in death, sorrow, overwhelming calamity or the tragic
return of Karma, a note that is yet not altogether absent from the Indian
mind, —for it is there in the Mahabharata and was added later on to the
earlier triumphant and victorious close of the Ramayana; but a closing air of
peace and calm was more congenial to the sattwic turn of the Indian
temperament and imagination. It is due to the absence of any bold dramatic
treatment of the great issues and problems of life. These dramas are mostly
romantic plays reproducing the images and settled paces of the most cultured
life of the time cast into the frame of old myth and legend, but a few are
more realistic and represent the type of the citizen householder or other
scenes of the times or a historical subject. The magnificent courts of kings or
the beauty of the surroundings of Nature are their more common scene. But
whatever their subject or kind, they are only brilliant transcripts or imaginative
transmutations of life, and something more is needed for the very greatest or
most moving dramatic creation. But their type still admits of a high or a
strong or delicate poetry and a representation, if not any very profound
interpretation of human action and motive and they do not fall short in this
kind. A great charm of poetic beauty and subtle feeling and
atmosphere,—reaching its most accomplished type in the Shakuntala of
Kalidasa, the most perfect and captivating romantic drama in
Page 365

all literature,—or an interesting turn of sentiment and action, a skilful
unobtrusive development according to the recognised principle and carefully
observed formula of the art, in temperate measure without violent noise of
incident or emphatic stress on situation or crowded figures, the movement
subdued to a key of suavity and calm, a delicate psychology, not a strongly
marked characterisation such as is commonly demanded in the dramatic art
of Europe, but a subtle indication by slight touches in the dialogue and action,
these are the usual characteristics. It is an art that was produced by and
appealed to a highly cultured class, refined, and intellectual and subtle, loving
best a tranquil aesthetic charm, suavity and beauty, and it has the limitations
of the kind but also its qualities. There is a constant grace and fineness of
work in the best period, a plainer and more direct but still fine vigour in Bhasa
and the writers who prolong him, a breath of largeness and power in the
dramas of Bhavabhuti, a high and consummate beauty in the perfection of
Kalidasa.
\par This drama, this poetry, the prose romances crowded with descriptive
detail, monographs like Bana's biography of Harsha or Jonaraja's history of
Cashmere, the collections of religious or romantic or realistic tales, the
Jatakas, the Kathasaritsagara with its opulence and inexhaustible abundance
of narrative in verse, the Panchatantra and the more concise Hitopadesha
which develop the form of the animal fable to make a piquant setting for a
mass of acute worldly wisdom and policy and statecraft, and a great body of
other less known work are only the surviving remnants of what, as many
indications show, must have been an immense literary activity, but they are
sufficiently abundant and representative to create a crowded and splendid
impression, a many-toned picture of a high culture, a rich intellectuality, a
great and ordered society with an opulent religious, aesthetic, ethical,
economic, political and vital activity, a many-sided development, a plentiful
life-movement. As completely as the earlier epics they belie the legend of an
India lost in metaphysics and religious dreamings and incapable of the great
things of life. The other element which has given rise to this conception, an
intense strain of philosophic thinking and religious experience, follows
Page 366

in fact at this time an almost separate movement and develops gradually
behind the pomp and motion of this outward action the thought, the
influences, the temperament and tendencies that were to govern another
millennium of the life of the Indian people.
Page 367

\par
\hn XX
\par
\ht Indian Literature–5
\par\drop The dominant note in the Indian mind, the temperament that has
been at the foundation of all its culture and originated and supported the
greater part of its creative action in philosophy, religion, art and life has been,
I have insisted, spiritual, intuitive and psychic: but this fundamental tendency
has not excluded but rather powerfully supported a strong and rich
intellectual, practical and vital activity. In the secular classical literature this
activity comes very much to the front, is the prominent characteristic and
puts the original spirit a little in the background. That does not mean that the
spirit is changed or lost or that there is nothing psychic or intuitive in the
secular poetry of the time. On the contrary all the type of the mind reflected
there is of the familiar Indian character constant through every change,
religio-philosophic, religio-ethical, religio-social, with all the past spiritual
experience behind it and supporting it though not prominently in the front; the
imagination is of the same kind that we have found in the art of the time; the
frames of significant image, symbol and myth are those which have come
down from the past subjected to the modifications and new developments
that get their full body in the Puranas, and they have a strong psychic
suggestion. The difference is that they take in the hands of these poets more
of the form of a tradition well understood and worked upon by the intellect
than of an original spiritual creation, and it is the intelligence that is prominent,
accepting and observing established ideas and things in this frame and type
and making its critical or reproductive observation and assent vivid with the
strong lines and rich colours of artistic presentation and embellishing image.
The original force, the intuitive vision work most strongly now in the outward,
in the sensuous, the objective, the vital aspects of existence, and it is these
that in this age are being more fully
Page 368

taken up, brought out and made in the religious field a support for an
extension of spiritual experience.
\par The sense of this evolution of the culture appears more clearly outside
the range of pure literature in the philosophic writings of the time and in the
religious poetry of the Puranas and Tantras. It was these two strains which
mixing together and soon becoming a single whole proved to be the most
living and enduring movement of the classical age, had the most abiding result
in the mind of the people, were the creating force and made the most
conspicuous part of the later popular literatures. It is a remarkable proof of
the native disposition, capacity and profound spiritual intelligence and feeling
of the national mind that the philosophic thinking of this period should have
left behind it this immense influence; for it was of the highest and severest
intellectual character. The tendency that had begun in earlier times and
created Buddhism, Jainism and the great schools of philosophy, the labour of
the metaphysical intellect to formulate to the reason the truths discovered by
the intuitive spiritual experience, to subject them to the close test of a logical
and severely dialectical ratiocination and to elicit from them all that the
thought could discover, reaches its greatest power of elaborate and careful
reasoning, minute criticism and analysis and forceful logical construction and
systematisation in the abundant philosophical writing of the period between
the sixth and thirteenth centuries marked especially by the work of the great
southern thinkers, Shankara, Ramanuja and Madhwa. It did not cease even
then, but survived its greatest days and continued even up to our own times
throwing up sometimes great creative thinking and often new and subtle
philosophical ideas in the midst of an incessant stream of commentary and
criticism on established lines. Here there was no decline but a continued
vigour of the metaphysical turn in the mind of the race. The work it did was
to complete the diffusion of the philosophic intelligence with the result that
even an average Indian mentality, once awakened, responds with a surprising
quickness to the most subtle and profound ideas. It is notable that no Hindu
religion old or new has been able to come into existence
Page 369

without developing as its support a clear philosophic content and suggestion.
\par The philosophical writings in prose make no pretension to rank as
literature; it is in these that the critical side is prominent, and they have no
well-built creative shape, but there are other productions in which a more
structural presentation of the complete thought is attempted and here the
literary form adopted is ordinarily the philosophical poem. The preference for
this form is a direct continuation of the tradition of the Upanishads and the
Gita. These works cannot be given a very high place as poetry: they are too
overweighted with thought and the preoccupation of an intellectual as
distinguished from an intuitive adequacy in the phrase to have the breath of
life and impetus of inspiration that are the indispensable attributes of the
creative poetic mind. It is the critical and affirmative intelligence that is most
active and not the vision seeing and interpretative. The epic greatness of the
soul that sees and chants the self-vision and God-vision and supreme
world-vision, the blaze of light that makes the power of the Upanishads, is
absent, and absent too the direct thought springing straight from the soul's life
and experience, the perfect, strong and suggestive phrase and the living
beauty of the rhythmic pace that make the poetic greatness of the Gita. At
the same time some of these poems are, if certainly not great poetry, yet
admirable literature combining a supreme philosophical genius with a
remarkable literary talent, not indeed creations, but noble and skilful
constructions, embodying the highest possible thought, using well all the
weighty, compact and sparing phrase of the classical Sanskrit speech,
achieving the harmony and noble elegance of its rhythms. These merits are
seen at their best in poems like the \s{Vivekac\=u\,d\=ama\,ni} attributed to
Shankara, and there we hear even, in spite of its too abstract turn, an
intellectual echo of the voice of the Upanishads and the manner of the Gita.
These poems, if inferior to the grandeur and beauty of earlier Indian work,
are at least equal in poetic style and superior in height of thought to the same
kind anywhere else and deservedly survive to fulfil the aim intended by their
writers. And one must not omit to mention a few snatches of philosophic
song here
Page 370

and there that are a quintessence at once of philosophic thought and poetic
beauty, or the abundant literature of hymns, many of them consummate in
their power and fervour and their charm of rhythm and expression which
prepare us for the similar but larger work in the later regional literature.
\par The philosophical creations of India differ in this respect from the bulk of
the metaphysical thinking of Europe that even when they most adopt the
intellectual form and method, yet their real substance is not intellectual, but is
rather the result of a subtle and very profound intelligence working on the
stuff of sight and spiritual experience. This is the result of the constant unity
India has preserved between philosophy, religion and Yoga. The philosophy is
the intuitive or intellectual presentation of the truth that was sought for first
through the religious mind and its experiences and it is never satisfied by
discovering truth to the idea and justifying it to the logical intelligence,
although that is admirably done, but has its eye always turned to realisation in
the soul's life, the object of Yoga. The thinking of this age, even in giving so
much prominence to the intellectual side, does not depart from this constant
need of the Indian temperament. It works out from spiritual experience
through the exact and laborious inspection and introspection of the intellect
and works backward and in again from the intellectual perceptions to new
gains of spiritual experience. There is indeed a tendency of fragmentation
and exclusiveness; the great integral truth of the Upanishads has already
been broken into divergent schools of thought and these are now farther
subdividing into still less comprehensive systems; but still in each of these
lessened provinces there is a gain of minute or intensive searching and on the
whole, if a loss of breadth on the heights, in recompense some extension of
assimilable spiritual knowledge. And this rhythm of exchange between the
spirit and the intelligence, the spirit illumining, the intelligence searching and
arriving and helping the lower life to absorb the intuitions of the spirit, did its
part in giving Indian spirituality a wonderful intensity, security and persistence
not exampled in any other people. It is indeed largely the work of these
philosophers who were at the same time Yogins that
Page 371

saved the soul of India alive through the gathering night of her decadence.
\par This however could not have been done without the aid of a great body
of more easily seizable ideas, forms, images, appealing to the imagination,
emotions, ethical and aesthetic sense of the people, that had to be partly an
expression of the higher spiritual truth and partly a bridge of transition
between the normal religious and the spiritual mentality. The need was met
by the Tantras and Puranas. The Puranas are the religious poetry peculiar to
this period: for although the form probably existed in ancient times, it is only
now that it was entirely developed and became the characteristic and the
principal literary expression of the religious spirit, and it is to this period that
we must attribute, not indeed all the substance, but the main bulk and the
existing shape of the Puranic writings. The Puranas have been much
discredited and depreciated in recent times, since the coming in of modern
ideas coloured by Western rationalism and the turning of the intelligence
under new impulses back towards the earlier fundamental ideas of the
ancient culture. Much however of this depreciation is due to an entire
misunderstanding of the purpose, method and sense of the mediaeval religious
writings. It is only in an understanding of the turn of the Indian religious
imagination and of the place of these writings in the evolution of the culture
that we can seize their sense.
\par In fact the better comprehension that is now returning to us of our own
self and past shows that the Puranic religions are only a new form and
extension of the truth of the ancient spirituality and philosophy and
socio-religious culture. In their avowed intention they are popular summaries
of the cosmogony, symbolic myth and image, tradition, cult, social rule of the
Indian people continued, as the name Purana signifies, from ancient times.
There is no essential change, but only a change of forms. The psychic
symbols or true images of truth belonging to the Vedic age disappear or are
relegated to a subordinate plan with a changed and diminished sense: others
take their place more visibly large in aim, cosmic, comprehensive, not starting
with conceptions drawn from the physical universe, but supplied
Page 372

entirely from the psychic universe within us. The Vedic gods and goddesses
conceal from the profane by their physical aspect their psychic and spiritual
significance. The Puranic trinity and the forms of its female energies have on
the contrary no meaning to the physical mind or imagination, but are
philosophic and psychic conceptions and embodiments of the unity and
multiplicity of the all-manifesting Godhead. The Puranic cults have been
characterised as a degradation of the Vedic religion, but they might
conceivably be described, not in the essence, for that remains always the
same, but in the outward movement, as an extension and advance. Image
worship and temple cult and profuse ceremony, to whatever superstition or
externalism their misuse may lead, are not necessarily a degradation. The
Vedic religion had no need of images, for the physical signs of its godheads
were the forms of physical Nature and the outward universe was their visible
house. The Puranic religion worshipped the psychical forms of the Godhead
within us and had to express it outwardly in symbolic figures and house it in
temples that were an architectural sign of cosmic significances. And the very
inwardness it intended necessitated a profusion of outward symbol to embody
the complexity of these inward things to the physical imagination and vision.
The religious aesthesis has changed, but the meaning of the religion has been
altered only in temperament and fashion, not in essence. The real difference
is this that the early religion was made by men of the highest mystic and
spiritual experience living among a mass still impressed mostly by the life of
the physical universe: the Upanishads casting off the physical veil created a
free transcendent and cosmic vision and experience and this was expressed
by a later age to the mass in images containing a large philosophical and
intellectual meaning of which the Trinity and the Shaktis of Vishnu and Shiva
are the central figures: the Puranas carried forward this appeal to the intellect
and imagination and made it living to the psychic experience, the emotions,
the aesthetic feeling and the senses. A constant attempt to make the spiritual
truths discovered by the Yogin and the Rishi integrally expressive, appealing,
effective to the whole nature of man and to
Page 373

provide outward means by which the ordinary mind, the mind of a whole
people might be drawn to a first approach to them is the sense of the
religio-philosophic evolution of Indian culture.
\par It is to be observed that the Puranas and Tantras contain in themselves
the highest spiritual and philosophical truths, not broken up and expressed in
opposition to each other as in the debates of the thinkers, but synthetised by a
fusion, relation or grouping in the way most congenial to the catholicity of the
Indian mind and spirit. This is done sometimes expressly, but most often in a
form which might carry something of it to the popular imagination and feeling
by legend, tale, symbol, apologue, miracle and parable. An immense and
complex body of psycho-spiritual experience is embodied in the Tantras,
supported by visual images and systematised in forms of Yogic practice. This
element is also found in the Puranas, but more loosely and cast out in a less
strenuous sequence. This method is after all simply a prolongation, in another
form and with a temperamental change, of the method of the Vedas. The
Puranas construct a system of physical images and observances each with its
psychical significance. Thus the sacredness of the confluence of the three
rivers, Ganga, Yamuna and Saraswati, is a figure of an inner confluence and
points to a crucial experience in a psycho-physical process of Yoga and it has
too other significances, as is common in the economy of this kind of
symbolism. The so-called fantastic geography of the Puranas, as we are
expressly told in the Puranas themselves, is a rich poetic figure, a symbolic
geography of the inner psychical universe. The cosmogony expressed
sometimes in terms proper to the physical universe has, as in the Veda, a
spiritual and psychological meaning and basis. It is easy to see how in the
increasing ignorance of later times the more technical parts of the Puranic
symbology inevitably lent themselves to much superstition and to crude
physical ideas about spiritual and psychic things. But that danger attends all
attempts to bring them to the comprehension of the mass of men and this
disadvantage should not blind us to the enormous effect produced in training
the mass mind to respond to a psycho-religious and psycho-spiritual appeal
that prepares a capacity
Page 374

for higher things. That effect endures even though the Puranic system may
have to be superseded by a finer appeal and the awakening to more directly
subtle significances, and if such a supersession becomes possible, it will itself
be due very largely to the work done by the Puranas.
\par The Puranas are essentially a true religious poetry, an art of aesthetic
presentation of religious truth. All the bulk of the eighteen Puranas does not
indeed take a high rank in this kind: there is much waste substance and not a
little of dull and dreary matter, but on the whole the poetic method employed
is justified by the richness and power of the creation. The earliest work is the
best—with one exception at the end in a new style which stands by itself and
is unique. The Vishnu Purana for instance in spite of one or two desert
spaces is a remarkable literary creation of a very considerable quality
maintaining much of the direct force and height of the old epic style. There is
in it a varied movement, much vigorous and some sublime epic writing, an
occasional lyrical element of a lucid sweetness and beauty, a number of
narratives of the finest verve and skilful simplicity of poetic workmanship.
The Bhagavat coming at the end and departing to a great extent from the
more popular style and manner, for it is strongly affected by the learned and
more ornately literary form of speech, is a still more remarkable production
full of subtlety, rich and deep thought and beauty. It is here that we get the
culmination of the movement which had the most important effects on the
future, the evolution of the emotional and ecstatic religions of Bhakti. The
tendency that underlay this development was contained in the earlier forms of
the religious mind of India and was slowly gaining ground, but it had hitherto
been overshadowed and kept from its perfect formation by the dominant
tendency towards the austerities of knowledge and action and the seeking of
the spiritual ecstasy only on the highest planes of being. The turn of the
classical age outward to the exterior life and the satisfaction of the senses
brought in a new inward turn of which the later ecstatic forms of the
Vaishnava religion were the most complete manifestation. Confined to the
secular and outward this fathoming of vital
Page 375

and sensuous experience might have led only to a relaxation of nerve and
vigour, an ethical degeneracy or licence; but the Indian mind is always
compelled by its master impulse to reduce all its experience of life to the
corresponding spiritual term and factor and the result was a transfiguring of
even these most external things into a basis for new spiritual experience. The
emotional, the sensuous, even the sensual motions of the being, before they
could draw the soul farther outward, were taken and transmuted into a
psychical form and, so changed, they became the elements of a mystic
capture of the Divine through the heart and the senses and a religion of the
joy of God's love, delight and beauty. In the Tantra the new elements are
taken up and assigned their place in a complete psycho-spiritual and
psycho-physical science of Yoga. Its popular form in the Vaishnava religion
centres round the mystic apologue of the pastoral life of the child Krishna. In
the Vishnu Purana the tale of Krishna is a heroic saga of the divine Avatar:
in later Puranas we see the aesthetic and erotic symbol developing and in the
Bhagavat it is given its full power and prepared to manifest its entire spiritual
and philosophic as well as its psychic sense and to remould into its own lines
by a shifting of the centre of synthesis from knowledge to spiritual love and
delight the earlier significance of Vedanta. The perfect outcome of this
evolution is to be found in the philosophy and religion of divine love
promulgated by Chaitanya.
\par It is the later developments of Vedantic philosophy, the Puranic ideas
and images and the poetic and aesthetic spirituality of the religions of
devotion that inspired from their birth the regional literatures. The literature of
the Sanskrit tongue does not come to any abrupt end. Poetry of the classical
type continues to be written especially in the South down to a comparatively
late period and Sanskrit remains still the language of philosophy and of all
kinds of scholarship: all prose work, all the work of the critical mind is written
in the ancient tongue. But the genius rapidly fades out from it, it becomes
stiff, heavy and artificial and only a scholastic talent remains to keep it in
continuance. In every province the local tongues arise here earlier, there a
little later to the dignity of literature and become the vehicle of
Page 376

poetic creation and the instrument of popular culture. Sanskrit, although not
devoid of popular elements, is essentially and in the best sense an aristocratic
speech developing and holding to the necessity of a noble aspiration and the
great manner a high spiritual, intellectual, ethical and aesthetic culture, then
possible in this manner only to the higher classes, and handing it down by
various channels of impression and transfusion and especially by religion, art
and social and ethical rule to the mass of the people. Pali in the hands of the
Buddhists becomes a direct means of this transmission. The poetry of the
regional tongues on the contrary creates, in every sense of the word, a
popular literature. The Sanskrit writers were men of the three highest castes,
mostly Brahmins and Kshatriyas, and later they were learned men writing for
a highly cultured elite; the Buddhist writers too were for the most part
philosophers, monks, kings, preachers writing sometimes for themselves,
sometimes in a more popular form for the mass of the people; but the poetry
of the regional tongues sprang straight from the heart of the people and its
writers came from all classes from the Brahmin to the lowest Shudra and the
outcaste. It is only in Urdu and to a less degree in the Southern tongues, as in
Tamil whose great period is contemporaneous with the classical Sanskrit, its
later production continuing during the survival of independent or
semi-independent courts and kingdoms in the South, that there is a strong
influence of the learned or classical temperament and habit; but even here
there is a very considerable popular element as in the songs of the Shaiva
saints and Vaishnava Alwars. The field here is too large to be easily known
in its totality or to permit of a rapid survey, but something must be said of the
character and value of this later literature that we may see how vital and
persistently creative Indian culture remained even in a period which
compared with its greater times might be regarded as a period of restriction
and decadence.
\par As the Sanskrit literature begins with the Vedas and Upanishads, these
later literatures begin with the inspired poetry of saints and devotees: for in
India it is always a spiritual movement that is the source or at least imparts
the impulse of formation
Page 377

to new ideas and possibilities and initiates the changes of the national life. It is
this kind that predominated almost throughout the creative activity of most of
these tongues before modern times, because it was always poetry of this type
that was nearest to the heart and mind of the people; and even where the
work is of a more secular spirit, the religious turn enters into it and provides
the framework, a part of the tone or the apparent motive. In abundance, in
poetic excellence, in the union of spontaneous beauty of motive and lyrical
skill this poetry has no parallel in its own field in any other literature. A
sincerity of devotional feeling is not enough to produce work of this high turn
of beauty, as is shown by the sterility of Christian Europe in this kind; it needs
a rich and profound spiritual culture. Another part of the literature is devoted
to the bringing of something of the essence of the old culture into the popular
tongues through new poetic versions of the story of the Mahabharata and the
Ramayana or in romantic narrative founded on the ancient legends; and here
again we have work of the very greatest genius as well as much of a lesser
but still high order. A third type presents vividly the religious beliefs and
feelings of the people, the life of court and city and village and hamlet, of
landholder and trader and artisan and peasant. The bulk of the work done in
the regional tongues falls under one or other of these heads, but there are
variations such as the religio-ethical and political poems of Ramdas in
Maharashtra or the gnomic poetry, the greatest in plan, conception and force
of execution ever written in this kind, of the Tamil saint, Tiruvalluvar. There
is too in one or two of these languages a later erotic poetry not without
considerable lyrical beauty of an entirely mundane inspiration. The same
culture reigns amid many variations of form in all this work of the regional
peoples, but each creates on the lines of its own peculiar character and
temperament and this gives a different stamp, the source of a rich variety in
the unity, to each of these beautiful and vigorous literatures.
\par Thus under the stress of temperamental variation the poetry of the
Vaishnavas puts on very different artistic forms in different provinces. There
is first the use of the psychical symbol created
Page 378

by the Puranas, and this assumes its most complete and artistic shape in
Bengal and becomes there a long continued tradition. The desire of the soul
for God is there thrown into symbolic figure in the lyrical love cycle of Radha
and Krishna, the Nature soul in man seeking for the Divine Soul through love,
seized and mastered by his beauty, attracted by his magical flute, abandoning
human cares and duties for this one overpowering passion and in the cadence
of its phases passing through first desire to the bliss of union, the pangs of
separation, the eternal longing and reunion, the \s{l\=il\=a} of the love of the
human spirit for God. There is a settled frame and sequence, a subtly simple
lyrical rhythm, a traditional diction of appealing directness and often of
intense beauty. This accomplished lyrical form springs at once to perfect birth
from the genius of the first two poets who used the Bengali tongue,
Vidyapati, a consummate artist of word and line, and the inspired singer
Chandidas in whose name stand some of the sweetest and most poignant and
exquisite love-lyrics in any tongue. The symbol here is sustained in its most
external figure of human passion and so consistently that it is now supposed
by many to mean nothing else, but this is quite negatived by the use of the
same figures by the devout poets of the religion of Chaitanya. All the spiritual
experience that lay behind the symbol was embodied in that inspired prophet
and incarnation of the ecstasy of divine love and its spiritual philosophy put
into clear form in his teaching. His followers continued the poetic tradition of
the earlier singers and though they fall below them in genius, yet left behind a
great mass of this kind of poetry always beautiful in form and often deep and
moving in substance. Another type is created in the perfect lyrics of the
Rajput queen Mirabai, in which the images of the Krishna symbol are more
directly turned into a song of the love and pursuit of the divine Lover by the
soul of the singer. In the Bengal poetry the expression preferred is the
symbolic figure impersonal to the poet: here a personal note gives the peculiar
intensity to the emotion. This is given a still more direct turn by a southern
poetess in the image of herself as the bride of Krishna. The peculiar power
of this kind of Vaishnava religion and poetry
Page 379

is in the turning of all the human emotions Godward, the passion of love being
preferred as the intensest and most absorbing of them all, and though the idea
recurs wherever there has been a strong development of devotional religion,
it has nowhere been used with so much power and sincerity as in the work of
the Indian poets.
\par Other Vaishnava poetry does not use the Krishna symbol, but is rather
addressed in language of a more direct devotion to Vishnu or centres
sometimes around the Rama Avatar. The songs of Tukaram are the best
known of this kind. The Vaishnava poetry of Bengal avoids except very
rarely any element of intellectualising thought and relies purely on emotional
description, a sensuous figure of passion and intensity of feeling: Maratha
poetry on the contrary has from the beginning a strong intellectual strain. The
first Marathi poet is at once a devotee, a Yogin and a thinker; the poetry of
the saint Ramdas, associated with the birth and awakening of a nation, is
almost entirely a stream of religious ethical thinking raised to the lyrical pitch;
and it is the penetrating truth and fervour of a thought arising from the heart
of devotion that makes the charm and power of Tukaram's songs. A long
strain of devotee poets keeps sounding the note that he struck and their work
fills the greater space of Marathi poetry. The same type takes a lighter and
more high-pitched turn in the poetry of Kabir. In Bengal again at the end of
the Mahomedan period there is the same blending of fervent devotion with
many depths and turns of religious thought in the songs of Ramprasad to the
divine Mother, combined here with a vivid play of imagination turning all
familiar things into apt and pregnant images and an intense spontaneity of
feeling. In the South a profounder philosophic utterance is often fused into the
devotional note, especially in the Shaiva poets, and, as in the early Sanskrit
poetry, vivified by a great power of living phrase and image, and farther north
the high Vedantic spirituality renews itself in the Hindi poetry of Surdas and
inspires Nanak and the Sikh gurus. The spiritual culture prepared and
perfected by two millenniums of the ancient civilisation has flooded the mind
of all these peoples and given birth to great new literatures and
Page 380

its voice is heard continually through all their course.
\par The narrative poetry of this age is less striking and original except for a
certain number of great or famous works. Most of these tongues have felt
the cultural necessity of transferring into the popular speech the whole
central story of the Mahabharata or certain of its episodes and, still more
universally, the story of the Ramayana. In Bengal there is the Mahabharata
of Kashiram, the gist of the old epic simply retold in a lucid classical style,
and the Ramayana of Krittibas, more near to the vigour of the soil, neither of
them attaining to the epic manner but still written with a simple poetic skill
and a swift narrative force. Only two however of these later poets arrived at
a vividly living recreation of the ancient story and succeeded in producing a
supreme masterpiece, Kamban, the Tamil poet who makes of his subject a
great original epic, and Tulsidas whose famed Hindi Ramayana combines
with a singular mastery lyric intensity, romantic richness and the sublimity of
the epic imagination and is at once a story of the divine Avatar and a long
chant of religious devotion. An English historian of the literature has even
claimed for Tulsidas's poem superiority to the epic of Valmiki: that is an
exaggeration and, whatever the merits, there cannot be a greater than the
greatest, but that such claims can be made for Tulsidas and Kamban is
evidence at least of the power of the poets and a proof that the creative
genius of the Indian mind has not declined even in the narrowing of the range
of its culture and knowledge. All this poetry indeed shows a gain in intensity
that compensates to some extent for the loss of the ancient height and
amplitude.
\par While this kind of narrative writing goes back to the epics, another
seems to derive its first shaping and motive from the classical poems of
Kalidasa, Bharavi and Magha. A certain number take for their subject, like
that earlier poetry, episodes of the Mahabharata or other ancient or Puranic
legends, but the classical and epic manner has disappeared, the inspiration
resembles more that of the Puranas and there is the tone and the looser and
easier development of the popular romance. This kind is commoner in
western India and excellence in it is the title to fame of Premananda, the
most considerable of the Gujerati
Page 381

poets. In Bengal we find another type of half-romantic half-realistic narrative
which develops a poetic picture of the religious mind and life and scenes of
contemporary times and has a strong resemblance in its motive to the more
outward element in the aim of Rajput painting. The life of Chaitanya written
in a simple and naive romance verse, appealing by its directness and sincerity
but inadequate in poetic form, is a unique contemporary presentation of the
birth and foundation of a religious movement. Two other poems that have
become classics, celebrate the greatness of Durga or Chandi, the goddess
who is the Energy of Shiva,—the “Chandi” of Mukundaram, a pure romance
of great poetic beauty which presents in its frame of popular legend a very
living picture of the life of the people, and the “Annadamangal” of
Bharatchandra repeating in its first part the Puranic tales of the gods as they
might be imagined by the Bengali villager in the type of his own human life,
telling in the second a romantic love story and in the third a historical incident
of the time of Jehangir, all these disparate elements forming the development
of the one central motive and presented without any imaginative elevation but
with an unsurpassable vividness of description and power of vital and
convincing phrase. All this poetry, the epic and the romance, the didactic
poem, of which Ramdas and the famous Kural of Tiruvalluvar are the chief
representatives, and the philosophic and devotional lyrics are not the creation
or meant for the appreciation of a cultivated class, but with few exceptions
the expression of a popular culture. The Ramayana of Tulsidas, the songs of
Ramprasad and of the Bauls, the wandering Vaishnava devotees, the poetry
of Ramdas and Tukaram, the sentences of Tiruvalluvar and the poetess
Avvai and the inspired lyrics of the southern saints and Alwars were known
to all classes and their thought or their emotion entered deeply into the life of
the people.
\par I have dwelt at this length on the literature because it is, not indeed the
complete, but still the most varied and ample record of the culture of a
people. Three millenniums at least of a creation of this kind and greatness are
surely the evidence of a real and very remarkable culture. The last period
shows no
Page 382

doubt a gradual decline, but one may note the splendour even of the decline
and especially the continued vitality of religious, literary and artistic creation.
At the moment when it seemed to be drawing to a close it has revived at the
first chance and begins again another cycle, at first precisely in the three
things that lasted the longest, spiritual and religious activity, literature and
painting, but already the renewal promises to extend itself to all the many
activities of life and culture in which India was once a great and leading
people.
Page 383

\par
\hn XXI
\par
\ht Indian Polity
\par\drop I have spoken hitherto of the greatness of Indian civilisation in the
things most important to human culture, those activities that raise man to his
noblest potentialities as a mental, a spiritual, religious, intellectual, ethical,
aesthetic being, and in all these matters the cavillings of the critics break
down before the height and largeness and profundity revealed when we look
at the whole and all its parts in the light of a true understanding of the spirit
and intention and a close discerning regard on the actual achievement of the
culture. There is revealed not only a great civilisation, but one of the half
dozen greatest of which we have a still existing record. But there are many
who would admit the greatness of the achievement of India in the things of
the mind and the spirit, but would still point out that she has failed in life, her
culture has not resulted in a strong, successful or progressive organisation of
life such as Europe shows to us, and that in the end at least the highest part
of her mind turned away from life to asceticism and an inactive and
world-shunning pursuit by the individual of his personal spiritual salvation. Or
at most she has come only to a certain point and then there has been an
arrest and decadence.
\par This charge weighs with an especial heaviness in the balance today
because the modern man, even the modern cultured man, is or tends to be to
a degree quite unprecedented {\it politikon z\=oon}, a political, economic and
social being valuing above all things the efficiency of the outward existence
and the things of the mind and spirit mainly, when not exclusively, for their aid
to humanity's vital and mechanical progress: he has not that regard of the
ancients which looked up towards the highest heights and regarded an
achievement in the things of the mind and the spirit with an unquestioning
admiration or a deep veneration for its own sake as the greatest possible
contribution to human culture
Page 384

and progress. And although this modern tendency is exaggerated and ugly
and degrading in its exaggeration, inimical to humanity's spiritual evolution, it
has this much of truth behind it that while the first value of a culture is its
power to raise and enlarge the internal man, the mind, the soul, the spirit, its
soundness is not complete unless it has shaped also his external existence and
made of it a rhythm of advance towards high and great ideals. This is the true
sense of progress and there must be as part of it a sound political, economic
and social life, a power and efficiency enabling a people to survive, to grow
and to move securely towards a collective perfection, and a vital elasticity
and responsiveness that will give room for a constant advance in the outward
expression of the mind and the spirit. If a culture does not serve these ends,
then there is evidently a defect somewhere either in its essential conceptions
or its wholeness or in its application that will seriously detract from its claims
to a complete and integral value.
\par The ideals that governed the spirit and body of Indian society were of
the highest kind, its social order secured an inexpugnable basic stability, the
strong life force that worked in it was creative of an extraordinary energy,
richness and interest, and the life organised remarkable in its opulence,
variety in unity, beauty, productiveness, movement. All the records of Indian
history, art and literature bear evidence to a cultural life of this character and
even in decline and dissolution there survives some stamp of it to remind
however faintly and distantly of the past greatness. To what then does the
charge brought against Indian culture as an agent of the life power amount
and what is its justification? In its exaggerated form it is founded upon the
characteristics of the decline and dissolution, the features of the decadence
read backward into the time of greatness, and it amounts to this that India has
always shown an incompetence for any free or sound political organisation
and has been constantly a divided and for the most part of her long history a
subject nation, that her economic system whatever its bygone merits, if it had
any, remained an inelastic and static order that led in modern conditions to
poverty and failure and her
Page 385

society an unprogressive hierarchy, caste-ridden, full of semi-barbaric abuses,
only fit to be thrown on the scrap-heap among the broken rubbish of the past
and replaced by the freedom, soundness and perfection or at least the
progressive perfectibility of the European social order. It is necessary to
reestablish the real facts and their meaning and afterwards it will be time to
pass judgment on the political, the economic and the social aspects of Indian
culture.
\par The legend of Indian political incompetence has arisen from a false view
of the historical development and an insufficient knowledge of the ancient
past of the country. It has long been currently supposed that she passed at
once from the freer type of the primitive Aryan or Vedic social and political
organisation to a system socially marked by the despotism of the Brahmin
theocracy and politically by an absolute monarchy of the oriental, by which is
meant the Western Asiatic, type and has remained fixed in these two things
for ever after. That summary reading of Indian history has been destroyed by
a more careful and enlightened scholarship and the facts are of a quite
different nature. It is true that India never evolved either the scrambling and
burdensome industrialism or the parliamentary organisation of freedom and
self-styled democracy characteristic of the bourgeois or Vaishya period of
the cycle of European progress. But the time is passing when the uncritical
praise of these things as the ideal state and the last word of social and
political progress was fashionable, their defects are now visible and the
greatness of an oriental civilisation need not be judged by the standard of
these Western developments. Indian scholars have attempted to read the
modern ideas and types of democracy and even a parliamentary system into
the past of India, but this seems to me an ill-judged endeavour. There was a
strong democratic element, if we must use the Western terms, in Indian polity
and even institutions that present a certain analogy to the parliamentary form,
but in reality these features were of India's own kind and not at all the same
thing as modern parliaments and modern democracy. And so considered they
are a much more remarkable evidence of the political capacity of the Indian
people in their
Page 386

living adaptation to the ensemble of the social mind and body of the nation
than when we judge them by the very different standard of Western society
and the peculiar needs of its cultural cycle.
\par The Indian system began with a variation of the type generally
associated with the early history of the Aryan peoples; but certain features
have a more general character and belong to a still earlier stage in the social
development of the human race. It was a clan or tribal system, Kula, founded
upon the equality of all the freemen of the clan or race; this was not at first
firmly founded upon the territorial basis, the migratory tendency was still in
evidence or recurred under pressure and the land was known by the name of
the people who occupied it, the Kuru country or simply the Kurus, the
Malava country or the Malavas. After the fixed settlement within determined
boundaries the system of the clan or tribe continued, but found a basic unit or
constituent atom in the settled village community. The meeting of the people,
\s{vi\'sa\,h}, assembling for communal deliberation, for sacrifice and worship or
as the host for war, remained for a long time the power-sign of the mass
body and the agent of the active common life with the king as the head and
representative, but long depending even after his position became hereditary
on the assent of the people for his formal election or confirmation. The
religious institution of the sacrifice developed in time a class of priests and
inspired singers, men trained in the ritual or in possession of the mystic
knowledge which lay behind the symbols of the sacrifice, the seed of the
great Brahminic institution. These were not at first hereditary, but exercised
other professions and belonged in their ordinary life to the general body of the
people. This free and simple natural constitution of the society seems to have
been general at first throughout Aryan India.
\par The later development out of this primitive form followed up to a certain
point the ordinary line of evolution as we see it in other communities, but at
the same time threw up certain very striking peculiarities that owing to the
unique mentality of the race fixed themselves, became prominent
characteristics
Page 387

and gave a different stamp to the political, economic and social factors of
Indian civilisation. The hereditary principle emerged at an early stage and
increased constantly its power and hold on the society until it became
everywhere the basis of the whole organisation of its activities. A hereditary
kingship was established, a powerful princely and warrior class appeared, the
rest of the people were marked off as the caste of traders, artisans and
agriculturalists and a subject or menial caste was added, perhaps sometimes
as the result of conquest but more probably or more commonly from
economic necessity, of servants and labourers. The predominance from early
times of the religious and spiritual tendency in the mind of the Indian people
brought about at the top of the social system the growth of the Brahmin
order, priests, scholars, legists, repositories of the sacred lore of the Vedas, a
development paralleled elsewhere but here given an unequalled permanence
and definiteness and supreme importance. In other countries with a less
complex mentality this predominance might have resulted in a theocracy: but
the Brahmins in spite of their ever-increasing and finally predominant
authority did not and could not usurp in India the political power. As
sacrosanct priests and legists and spiritual preceptors of the monarch and the
people they exercised a very considerable influence, but the real or active
political power remained with the king, the Kshatriya aristocracy and the
commons.
\par A peculiar figure for some time was the Rishi, the man of a higher
spiritual experience and knowledge, born in any of the classes, but exercising
an authority by his spiritual personality over all, revered and consulted by the
king of whom he was sometimes the religious preceptor and in the then fluid
state of social evolution able alone to exercise an important role in evolving
new basic ideas and effecting direct and immediate changes of the
socio-religious ideas and customs of the people. It was a marked feature of
the Indian mind that it sought to attach a spiritual meaning and a religious
sanction to all, even to the most external social and political circumstances of
its life, imposing on all classes and functions an ideal, not except incidentally
of rights and powers, but of duties, a rule of their
Page 388

action and an ideal way and temperament, character, spirit in the action, a
dharma with a spiritual significance. It was the work of the Rishi to put this
stamp enduringly on the national mind, to prolong and perpetuate it, to
discover and interpret the ideal law and its practical meaning, to cast the life
of the people into the well-shaped ideals and significant forms of a civilisation
founded on the spiritual and religious sense. And in later ages we find the
Brahminic schools of legists attributing their codes, though in themselves only
formulations of existing rule and custom, to the ancient Rishis. Whatever the
developments of the Indian socio-political body in later days, this original
character still exercised its influence, even when all tended at last to become
traditionalised and conventionalised instead of moving forward constantly in
the steps of a free and living practice.
\par The political evolution of this early system varied in different parts of
India. The ordinary development, as in most other countries, was in the
direction of an increasing emphasis on the control of the king as the centre,
head and unifying factor of a more and more complex system of rule and
administration and this prevailed eventually and became the universal type.
But for a long time it was combated and held in check by a contrary
tendency that resulted in the appearance and the strong and enduring vitality
of city or regional or confederated republics. The king became either a
hereditary or elected executive head of the republic or an archon
administering for a brief and fixed period or else he altogether disappeared
from the polity of the state. This turn must have come about in many cases
by a natural evolution of the power of the assemblies, but in others it seems
to have been secured by some kind of revolution and there appear to have
been vicissitudes, alternations between periods of monarchical and periods of
republican government. Among a certain number of the Indian peoples the
republican form finally asserted its hold and proved itself capable of a strong
and settled organisation and a long duration lasting over many centuries. In
some cases they were governed by a democratic assembly, in more by an
oligarchical senate. It is unfortunate that we know little of the details of the
constitution and nothing of the inner
Page 389

history of these Indian republics, but the evidence is clear of the high
reputation they enjoyed throughout India for the excellence of their civil and
the formidable efficiency of their military organisation. There is an interesting
dictum of Buddha that so long as the republican institutions were maintained
in their purity and vigour, a small state of this kind would remain invincible
even by the arms of the powerful and ambitious Magadhan monarchy, and
this opinion is amply confirmed by the political writers who consider the
alliance of the republics the most solid and valuable political and military
support a king could have and advise their reduction not so much by the force
of arms, as that would have a very precarious chance of success, but by
Machiavellian means,—similar to those actually employed in Greece by Philip
of Macedon,—aimed at undermining their internal unity and the efficiency of
their constitution.
\par These republican states were already long established and in vigorous
functioning in the sixth century before Christ, contemporary therefore with
the brilliant but ephemeral and troubled Greek city commonwealths, but this
form of political liberty in India long outlasted the period of Greek republican
freedom. The ancient Indian mind, not less fertile in political invention, must
be considered superior to that of the mercurial and restless Mediterranean
people in the capacity for a firm organisation and settled constitutional order.
Some of these states appear to have enjoyed a longer and a more settled
history of vigorous freedom than republican Rome, for they persisted even
against the mighty empire of Chandragupta and Asoka and were still in
existence in the early centuries of the Christian era. But none of them
developed the aggressive spirit and the conquering and widely organising
capacity of the Roman republic; they were content to preserve their own free
inner life and their independence. India especially after the invasion of
Alexander felt the need of a movement of unification and the republics were
factors of division: strong for themselves, they could do nothing for the
organisation of the peninsula, too vast indeed for any system of confederation
of small states to be possible—and indeed in the ancient world that
endeavour nowhere succeeded, always it
Page 390

broke down in the effort of expansion beyond certain narrow limits and could
not endure against the movement towards a more centralised government. In
India as elsewhere it was the monarchical state that grew and finally held the
field replacing all other forms of political organisation. The republican
organisation disappeared from her history and is known to us only by the
evidence of coins, scattered references and the testimony of Greek observers
and of the contemporary political writers and theorists who supported and
helped to confirm and develop the monarchical state throughout India.
\par But Indian monarchy previous to the Mahomedan invasion was not, in
spite of a certain sanctity and great authority conceded to the regal position
and the personality of the king as the representative of the divine Power and
the guardian of the Dharma, in any way a personal despotism or an absolutist
autocracy: it had no resemblance to the ancient Persian monarchy or the
monarchies of western and central Asia or the Roman imperial government
or later European autocracies: it was of an altogether different type from the
system of the Pathan or the Mogul emperors. The Indian king exercised
supreme administrative and judicial power, was in possession of all the
military forces of the kingdom and with his Council alone responsible for
peace and war and he had too a general supervision and control over the
good order and welfare of the life of the community, but his power was not
personal and it was besides hedged in by safeguards against abuse and
encroachment and limited by the liberties and powers of other public
authorities and interests who were, so to speak, lesser copartners with him in
the exercise of sovereignty and administrative legislation and control. He was
in fact a limited or constitutional monarch, although the machinery by which
the constitution was maintained and the limitation effected differed from the
kind familiar in European history; and even the continuance of his rule was
far more dependent than that of mediaeval European kings on the continued
will and assent of the people.
\par A greater sovereign than the king was the Dharma, the religious, ethical,
social, political, juridic and customary law
Page 391

organically governing the life of the people. This impersonal authority was
considered sacred and eternal in its spirit and the totality of its body, always
characteristically the same, the changes organically and spontaneously
brought about in its actual form by the evolution of the society being
constantly incorporated in it, regional, family and other customs forming a sort
of attendant and subordinate body capable of change only from within,—and
with the Dharma no secular authority had any right of autocratic
interference. The Brahmins themselves were recorders and exponents of the
Dharma, not its creators nor authorised to make at will any changes, although
it is evident that by an authoritative expression of opinion they could and did
favour or oppose this or that tendency to change of principle or detail. The
king was only the guardian, executor and servant of the Dharma, charged to
see to its observance and to prevent offences, serious irregularities and
breaches. He himself was bound the first to obey it and observe the rigorous
rule it laid on his personal life and action and on the province, powers and
duties of his regal authority and office.
\par This subjection of the sovereign power to the Dharma was not an ideal
theory inoperative in practice; for the rule of the socio-religious law actively
conditioned the whole life of the people and was therefore a living reality, and
it had in the political field very large practical consequences. It meant first
that the king had not the power of direct legislation and was limited to the
issue of administrative decrees that had to be in consonance with the
religious, social, political, economic constitution of the community,—and even
here there were other powers than that of the king who shared with him the
right of promulgating and seeing to the execution of administrative decrees
independently issued,—neither could he disregard in the general tenor and
character and the effective result of his administration the express or tacit
will of the people.
\par The religious liberties of the commons were assured and could not
normally be infringed by any secular authority; each religious community,
each new or long-standing religion could shape its own way of life and
institutions and had its own
Page 392

\NH authorities or governing bodies exercising in their proper field an entire
independence. There was no exclusive State religion and the monarch was
not the religious head of the people. Asoka in this respect seems to have
attempted an extension of the royal control or influence and similar velleities
were occasionally shown on a minor scale by other powerful sovereigns. But
Asoka's so-called edicts of this kind had a recommendatory rather than an
imperative character, and the sovereign who wished to bring about a change
in religious belief or institutions had always, in accordance with the Indian
principle of communal freedom and the obligation of a respect for and a
previous consultation of the wishes of those concerned, to secure the assent
of the recognised authorities or to refer the matter to a consultative assembly
for deliberation, as was done in the famous Buddhist councils, or to arrange a
discussion between the exponents of the different religions and abide by the
issue. The monarch might personally favour a particular sect or creed and his
active preference might evidently have a considerable propagandist influence,
but at the same time he was bound to respect and support in his public office
all the recognised religions of the people with a certain measure of
impartiality, a rule that explains the support extended by Buddhist and
Brahmin emperors to both the rival religions. At times there were, mainly in
the south, instances of petty or violent State persecutions, but these outbreaks
were a violation of the Dharma due to momentary passion at a time of acute
religious ferment and were always local and of a brief duration. Normally
there was no place in the Indian political system for religious oppression and
intolerance and a settled State policy of that kind was unthinkable.
\par The social life of the people was similarly free from autocratic
interference. Instances of royal legislation in this province are rare and here
too, when it occurred, there had to be a consultation of the will of those
concerned, as in the rearrangement or the reconstitution of the caste system
by the Sena kings in Bengal after its disorganisation during a long period of
Buddhist predominance. Change in the society was brought about not
artificially from above but automatically from within and
Page 393

principally by the freedom allowed to families or particular communities to
develop or alter automatically their own rule of life, \s{\=ac\=ara}.
\par In the sphere of administration the power of the king was similarly
hedged in by the standing constitution of the Dharma. His right of taxation
was limited in the most important sources of revenue to a fixed percentage as
a maximum and in other directions often by the right of the bodies
representing the various elements of the community to a voice in the matter
and always by the general rule that his right to govern was subject to the
satisfaction and good-will of the people. This as we shall see, was not merely
a pious wish or opinion of the Brahmin custodians of the Dharma. The king
was in person the supreme court and the highest control in the execution of
the civil and criminal law, but here too his role was that of the executor: he
was bound to administer the law faithfully as it stood through his judges or
with the aid of the Brahmin legists learned in these matters. He had the
complete and unfettered control in his Council only of foreign policy, military
administration and war and peace and of a great number of directive
activities. He was free to make efficient arrangements for all that part of the
administration that served to secure and promote the welfare of the
community, good order, public morals, and all such matters as could best be
supervised or regulated by the sovereign authority. He had a right of
patronage and punishment consistent with the law and was expected to
exercise it with a strict regard to an effect of general beneficence and
promotion of the public welfare.
\par There could therefore be ordinarily little or no room in the ancient Indian
system for autocratic freak or monarchical violence and oppression, much
less for the savage cruelty and tyranny of so common an occurrence in the
history of some other countries. Nevertheless such happenings were possible
by the sovereign's disregard of the Dharma or by a misuse of his power of
administrative decree; instances occurred of the kind,—though the worst
recorded is that of a tyrant belonging to a foreign dynasty; in other cases any
prolonged outbreak of autocratic caprice, violence or injustice seems to have
led
Page 394

\NH before long to an effective protest or revolt on the part of the people.
The legists provided for the possibility of oppression. In spite of the sanctity
and prestige attaching to the sovereign it was laid down that obedience
ceased to be binding if the king ceased to be faithful executor of the Dharma.
Incompetence and violation of the obligation to rule to the satisfaction of the
people were in theory and effect sufficient causes for his removal. Manu
even lays it down that an unjust and oppressive king should be killed by his
own subjects like a mad dog, and this justification by the highest authority of
the right or even the duty of insurrection and regicide in extreme cases is
sufficient to show that absolutism or the unconditional divine right of kings
was no part of the intention of the Indian political system. As a matter of fact
the right was actually exercised as we find both from history and literature.
Another more peaceful and more commonly exercised remedy was a threat
of secession or exodus which in most cases was sufficient to bring the
delinquent ruler to reason. It is interesting to find the threat of secession
employed against an unpopular monarch in the south as late as the
seventeenth century, as well as a declaration by a popular assembly
denouncing any assistance given to the king as an act of treason. A more
common remedy was deposition by the council of ministers or by the public
assemblies. The kingship thus constituted proved to be in effect moderate,
efficient and beneficent, served well the purposes assigned to it and secured
an abiding hold on the affections of the people. The monarchical institution
was however only one, an approved and very important, but not, as we see
from the existence of the ancient republics, an indispensable element of the
Indian socio-political system, and we shall understand nothing of the real
principle of the system and its working if we stop short with a view of the
regal fa\c{c}ade and fail to see what lay behind it. It is there that we shall find
the clue to the essential character of the whole construction.
Page 395

\par
\hn XXII
\par
\ht Indian Polity–2
\par\drop The true nature of the Indian polity can only be realised if we look
at it not as a separate thing, a machinery independent of the rest of the mind
and life of the people, but as a part of and in its relation to the organic totality
of the social existence.
\par A people, a great human collectivity, is in fact an organic living being
with a collective or rather—for the word collective is too mechanical to be
true to the inner reality—a common or communal soul, mind and body. The
life of the society like the physical life of the individual human being passes
through a cycle of birth, growth, youth, ripeness and decline, and if this last
stage goes far enough without any arrest of its course towards decadence, it
may perish,—even so all the older peoples and nations except India and
China perished,—as a man dies of old age. But the collective being has too
the capacity of renewing itself, of a recovery and a new cycle. For in each
people there is a soul idea or life idea at work, less mortal than its body, and if
this idea is itself sufficiently powerful, large and force-giving and the people
sufficiently strong, vital and plastic in mind and temperament to combine
stability with a constant enlargement or new application of the power of the
soul idea or life idea in its being, it may pass through many such cycles before
it comes to a final exhaustion. Moreover, the idea is itself only the principle of
soul manifestation of the communal being and each communal soul again a
manifestation and vehicle of the greater eternal spirit that expresses itself in
Time and on earth is seeking, as it were, its own fullness in humanity through
the vicissitudes of the human cycles. A people then which learns to live
consciously not solely in its physical and outward life, not even only in that
and the power of the life idea or soul idea that governs the changes of its
development and is the key to its
Page 396

psychology and temperament, but in the soul and spirit behind, may not at all
exhaust itself, may not end by disappearance or a dissolution or a fusion into
others or have to give place to a new race and people, but having itself fused
into its life many original smaller societies and attained to its maximum natural
growth pass without death through many renascences. And even if at any
time it appears to be on the point of absolute exhaustion and dissolution, it
may recover by the force of the spirit and begin another and perhaps a more
glorious cycle. The history of India has been that of the life of such a people.
\par The master idea that has governed the life, culture, social ideals of the
Indian people has been the seeking of man for his true spiritual self and the
use of life—subject to a necessary evolution first of his lower physical, vital
and mental nature—as a frame and means for that discovery and for man's
ascent from the ignorant natural into the spiritual existence. This dominant
idea India has never quite forgotten even under the stress and material
exigencies and the externalities of political and social construction. But the
difficulty of making the social life an expression of man's true self and some
highest realisation of the spirit within him is immensely greater than that
which attends a spiritual self-expression through the things of the mind,
religion, thought, art, literature, and while in these India reached extraordinary
heights and largenesses, she could not in the outward life go beyond certain
very partial realisations and very imperfect tentatives,—a general
spiritualising symbolism, an infiltration of the greater aspiration, a certain cast
given to the communal life, the creation of institutions favourable to the
spiritual idea. Politics, society, economics are the natural field of the two first
and grosser parts of human aim and conduct recognised in the Indian system,
interest and hedonistic desire: Dharma, the higher law, has nowhere been
brought more than partially into this outer side of life, and in politics to a very
minimum extent; for the effort at governing political action by ethics is usually
little more than a pretence. The coordination or true union of the collective
outward life with Moksha, the liberated spiritual existence, has hardly even
been conceived or
Page 397

attempted, much less anywhere succeeded in the past history of the yet
hardly adult human race. Accordingly, we find that the governance by the
Dharma of India's social, economic and even (though here the attempt broke
down earlier than in other spheres) her political rule of life, system, turn of
existence, with the adumbration of a spiritual significance behind,—the full
attainment of the spiritual life being left as a supreme aim to the effort of the
individual—was as far as her ancient system could advance. This much
endeavour, however, she did make with persistence and patience and it gave
a peculiar type to her social polity. It is perhaps for a future India, taking up
and enlarging with a more complete aim, a more comprehensive experience,
a more certain knowledge that shall reconcile life and the spirit, her ancient
mission, to found the status and action of the collective being of man on the
realisation of the deeper spiritual truth, the yet unrealised spiritual
potentialities of our existence and so ensoul the life of her people as to make
it the Lila of the greater Self in humanity, a conscious communal soul and
body of Virat, the universal spirit.
\par Another point must be noted which creates a difference between the
ancient polity of India and that of the European peoples and makes the
standards of the West as inapplicable here as in the things of the mind and
the inner culture. Human society has in its growth to pass through three
stages of evolution before it can arrive at the completeness of its possibilities.
The first is a condition in which the forms and activities of the communal
existence are those of the spontaneous play of the powers and principles of
its life. All its growth, all its formations, customs, institutions are then a
natural organic development,—the motive and constructive power coming
mostly from the subconscient principle of the life within it,—expressing, but
without deliberate intention, the communal psychology, temperament, vital
and physical need, and persisting or altering partly under the pressure of an
internal impulse, partly under that of the environment acting on the communal
mind and temper. In this stage the people is not yet intelligently self-conscious
in the way of the reason, is not yet a thinking collective being, and it does
Page 398

not try to govern its whole communal existence by the reasoning will, but
lives according to its vital intuitions or their first mental renderings. The early
framework of Indian society and polity grew up in such a period as in most
ancient and mediaeval communities, but also in the later age of a growing
social self-consciousness they were not rejected but only farther shaped,
developed, systematised so as to be always, not a construction of politicians,
legislators and social and political thinkers, but a strongly stable vital order
natural to the mind, instincts and life intuitions of the Indian people.
\par A second stage of the society is that in which the communal mind
becomes more and more intellectually self-conscious, first in its more cultured
minds, then more generally, first broadly, then more and more minutely and in
all the parts of its life. It learns to review and deal with its own life,
communal ideas, needs, institutions in the light of the developed intelligence
and finally by the power of the critical and constructive reason. This is a
stage which is full of great possibilities but attended too by serious
characteristic dangers. Its first advantages are those which go always with
the increase of a clear and understanding and finally an exact and scientific
knowledge and the culminating stage is the strict and armoured efficiency
which the critical and constructive, the scientific reason used to the fullest
degree offers as its reward and consequence. Another and greater outcome
of this stage of social evolution is the emergence of high and luminous ideals
which promise to raise man beyond the limits of the vital being, beyond his
first social, economic and political needs and desires and out of their
customary moulds and inspire an impulse of bold experiment with the
communal life which opens a field of possibility for the realisation of a more
and more ideal society. This application of the scientific mind to life with the
strict, well-finished, armoured efficiency which is its normal highest result,
this pursuit of great consciously proposed social and political ideals and the
progress which is the index of the ground covered in the endeavour, have
been, with whatever limits and drawbacks, the distinguishing advantages of
the political and social effort of Europe.
Page 399

\par On the other hand the tendency of the reason when it pretends to deal
with the materials of life as its absolute governor, is to look too far away from
the reality of the society as a living growth and to treat it as a mechanism
which can be manipulated at will and constructed like so much dead wood or
iron according to the arbitrary dictates of the intelligence. The sophisticating,
labouring, constructing, efficient, mechanising reason loses hold of the simple
principles of a people's vitality; it cuts it away from the secret roots of its life.
The result is an exaggerated dependence on system and institution, on
legislation and administration and the deadly tendency to develop, in place of
a living people, a mechanical State. An instrument of the communal life tries
to take the place of the life itself and there is created a powerful but
mechanical and artificial organisation; but, as the price of this exterior gain,
there is lost the truth of life of an organically self-developing communal soul
in the body of a free and living people. It is this error of the scientific reason
stifling the work of the vital and the spiritual intuition under the dead weight
of its mechanical method which is the weakness of Europe and has deceived
her aspiration and prevented her from arriving at the true realisation of her
own higher ideals.
\par It is only by reaching a third stage of the evolution of the collective social
as of the individual human being that the ideals first seized and cherished by
the thought of man can discover their own real source and character and
their true means and conditions of effectuation or the perfect society be
anything more than a vision on a shining cloud constantly run after in a circle
and constantly deceiving the hope and escaping the embrace. That will be
when man in the collectivity begins to live more deeply and to govern his
collective life neither primarily by the needs, instincts, intuitions welling up out
of the vital self, nor secondarily by the constructions of the reasoning mind,
but first, foremost and always by the power of unity, sympathy, spontaneous
liberty, supple and living order of his discovered greater self and spirit in
which the individual and the communal existence have their law of freedom,
perfection and oneness. That is a rule that has not yet anywhere found its
right conditions
Page 400

for even beginning its effort, for it can only come when man's attempt to
reach and abide by the law of the spiritual existence is no longer an
exceptional aim for individuals or else degraded in its more general aspiration
to the form of a popular religion, but is recognised and followed out as the
imperative need of his being and its true and right attainment the necessity of
the next step in the evolution of the race.
\par The small early Indian communities developed like others through the
first stage of a vigorous and spontaneous vitality, finding naturally and freely
its own norm and line, casting up form of life and social and political
institution out of the vital intuition and temperament of the communal being.
As they fused with each other into an increasing cultural and social unity and
formed larger and larger political bodies, they developed a common spirit and
a common basis and general structure allowing of a great freedom of
variation in minor line and figure. There was no need of a rigid uniformity; the
common spirit and life impulse were enough to impose on this plasticity a law
of general oneness. And even when there grew up the great kingdoms and
empires, still the characteristic institutions of the smaller kingdoms, republics,
peoples were as much as possible incorporated rather than destroyed or
thrown aside in the new cast of the socio-political structure. Whatever could
not survive in the natural evolution of the people or was no longer needed, fell
away of itself and passed into desuetude: whatever could last by modifying
itself to new circumstance and environment, was allowed to survive:
whatever was in intimate consonance with the psychical and the vital law of
being and temperament of the Indian people became universalised and took
its place in the enduring figure of the society and polity.
\par This spontaneous principle of life was respected by the age of growing
intellectual culture. The Indian thinkers on society, economics and politics,
Dharma Shastra and Artha Shastra, made it their business not to construct
ideals and systems of society and government in the abstract intelligence, but
to understand and regulate by the practical reason the institutions and ways
of communal living already developed by the communal mind and
Page 401

life and to develop, fix and harmonise without destroying the original
elements, and whatever new element or idea was needed was added or
introduced as a superstructure or a modifying but not a revolutionary and
destructive principle. It was in this way that the transition from the earlier
stages to the fully developed monarchical polity was managed; it proceeded
by an incorporation of the existing institutions under the supreme control of
the king or the emperor. The character and status of many of them was
modified by the superimposition of the monarchical or imperial system, but, as
far as possible, they did not pass out of existence. As a result we do not find
in India the element of intellectually idealistic political progress or
revolutionary experiment which has been so marked a feature of ancient and
of modern Europe. A profound respect for the creations of the past as the
natural expression of the Indian mind and life, the sound manifestation of its
Dharma or right law of being, was the strongest element in the mental
attitude and this preservative instinct was not disturbed but rather yet more
firmly settled and fixed by the great millennium of high intellectual culture. A
slow evolution of custom and institution conservative of the principle of
settled order, of social and political precedent, of established framework and
structure was the one way of progress possible or admissible. On the other
hand, Indian polity never arrived at that unwholesome substitution of the
mechanical for the natural order of the life of the people which has been the
disease of European civilisation now culminating in the monstrous artificial
organisation of the bureaucratic and industrial State. The advantages of the
idealising intellect were absent, but so also were the disadvantages of the
mechanising rational intelligence.
\par The Indian mind has always been profoundly intuitive in habit even when
it was the most occupied with the development of the reasoning intelligence,
and its political and social thought has therefore been always an attempt to
combine the intuitions of life and the intuitions of the spirit with the light of the
reason acting as an intermediary and an ordering and regulating factor. It has
tried to base itself strongly on the established and persistent actualities of life
and to depend for its idealism not
Page 402

on the intellect but on the illuminations, inspirations, higher experiences of the
spirit, and it has used the reason as a critical power testing and assuring the
steps and aiding but not replacing the life and the spirit—always the true and
sound constructors. The spiritual mind of India regarded life as a
manifestation of the self: the community was the body of the creator Brahma,
the people was a life body of Brahman in the \s{sama\,s\,ti}, the collectivity, it
was the collective Narayana, as the individual was Brahman in the \s{vya\,s\,ti},
the separate Jiva, the individual Narayana; the king was the living
representative of the Divine and the other orders of the community the
natural powers of the collective self, \s{prak\,rtaya\,h}. The agreed conventions,
institutes, customs, constitution of the body social and politic in all its parts
had therefore not only a binding authority but a certain sacrosanct character.
\par The right order of human life as of the universe is preserved according
to the ancient Indian idea by each individual being following faithfully his
swadharma, the true law and norm of his nature and the nature of his kind
and by the group being, the organic collective life, doing likewise. The family,
clan, caste, class, social, religious, industrial or other community, nation,
people are all organic group beings that evolve their own dharma and to
follow it is the condition of their preservation, healthy continuity, sound action.
There is also the dharma of the position, the function, the particular relation
with others, as there is too the dharma imposed by the condition, environment,
age, \s{yugadharma}, the universal religious or ethical dharma, and all these
acting on the natural dharma, the action according to the Swabhava, create
the body of the Law. The ancient theory supposed that in an entirely right
and sound condition of man, individual and collective,—a condition typified by
the legendary Golden Age, Satya Yuga, Age of Truth,—there is no need of
any political government or State or artificial construction of society, because
all then live freely according to the truth of their enlightened self and
God-inhabited being and therefore spontaneously according to the inner divine
Dharma. The self-determining individual and self-determining community
living
Page 403

according to the right and free law of his and its being is therefore the ideal.
But in the actual condition of humanity, its ignorant and devious nature
subject to perversions and violations of the true individual and the true social
dharma, there has to be superimposed on the natural life of society a State, a
sovereign power, a king or governing body, whose business is not to interfere
unduly with the life of the society, which must be allowed to function for the
most part according to its natural law and custom and spontaneous
development, but to superintend and assist its right process and see that the
Dharma is observed and in vigour and, negatively, to punish and repress and,
as far as may be, prevent offences against the Dharma. A more advanced
stage of corruption of the Dharma is marked by the necessity of the
appearance of the legislator and the formal government of the whole of life
by external or written law and code and rule; but to determine it—apart from
external administrative detail—was not the function of the political sovereign,
who was only its administrator, but of the socio-religious creator, the Rishi, or
the Brahminic recorder and interpreter. And the Law itself written or
unwritten was always not a thing to be new created or fabricated by a
political and legislative authority, but a thing already existent and only to be
interpreted and stated as it was or as it grew naturally out of pre-existing law
and principle in the communal life and consciousness. The last and worst
state of the society growing out of this increasing artificiality and convention
must be a period of anarchy and conflict and dissolution of the dharma,—Kali
Yuga,—which must precede through a red-grey evening of cataclysm and
struggle a recovery and a new self-expression of the spirit in the human
being.
\par The main function of the political sovereign, the king and council and the
other ruling members of the body politic, was therefore to serve and assist
the maintenance of the sound law of life of the society: the sovereign was the
guardian and administrator of the Dharma. The function of society itself
included the right satisfaction of the vital, economic and other needs of the
human being and of his hedonistic claim to pleasure and enjoyment, but
according to their right law and measure
Page 404

of \NH satisfaction and subject and subordinated to the ethical and social and
religious dharma. All the members and groups of the socio-political body had
their Dharma determined for them by their nature, their position, their relation
to the whole body and must be assured and maintained in the free and right
exercise of it, must be left to their own natural and self-determined
functioning within their own bounds, but at the same time restrained from any
transgression, encroachment or deviation from their right working and true
limits. That was the office of the supreme political authority, the sovereign in
his Council aided by the public assemblies. It was not the business of the
state authority to interfere with or encroach upon the free functioning of the
caste, religious community, guild, village, township or the organic custom of
the region or province or to abrogate their rights, for these were inherent
because necessary to the sound exercise of the social Dharma. All that it
was called upon to do was to coordinate, to exercise a general and supreme
control, to defend the life of the community against external attack or internal
disruption, to repress crime and disorder, to assist, promote and regulate in its
larger lines the economic and industrial welfare, to see to the provision of
facilities, and to use for these purposes the powers that passed beyond the
scope of the others.
\par Thus in effect the Indian polity was the system of a very complex
communal freedom and self-determination, each group unit of the community
having its own natural existence and administering its own proper life and
business, set off from the rest by a natural demarcation of its field and limits,
but connected with the whole by well-understood relations, each a copartner
with the others in the powers and duties of the communal existence,
executing its own laws and rules, administering within its own proper limits,
joining with the others in the discussion and the regulation of matters of a
mutual or common interest and represented in some way and to the degree of
its importance in the general assemblies of the kingdom or empire. The State,
sovereign or supreme political authority was an instrument of coordination
and of a general control and efficiency and exercised a supreme but not an
absolute authority; for in all its
Page 405

rights and powers it was limited by the Law and by the will of the people and
in all its internal functions only a copartner with the other members of the
socio-political body.
\par This was the theory and principle and the actual constitution of the
Indian polity, a complex of communal freedom and self-determination with a
supreme coordinating authority, a sovereign person and body, armed with
efficient powers, position and prestige, but limited to its proper rights and
functions, at once controlling and controlled by the rest, admitting them as its
active copartners in all branches, sharing the regulation and administration of
the communal existence, and all alike, the sovereign, the people and all its
constituent communities, bound to the maintenance and restrained by the
yoke of the Dharma. Moreover the economic and political aspects of the
communal life were only a part of the Dharma and a part not at all separate
but inextricably united with all the rest, the religious, the ethical, the higher
cultural aim of the social existence. The ethical law coloured the political and
economic and was imposed on every action of the king and his ministers, the
council and assemblies, the individual, the constituent groups of the society;
ethical and cultural considerations counted in the use of the vote and the
qualifications for minister, official and councillor; a high character and training
was expected from all who held authority in the affairs of the Aryan people.
The religious spirit and the reminders of religion were the head and the
background of the whole life of king and people. The life of the society was
regarded not so much as an aim in itself in spite of the necessary
specialisation of parts of its system, but in all its parts and the whole as a
great framework and training ground for the education of the human mind
and soul and its development through the natural to the spiritual existence.
Page 406

\par
\hn XXIII
\par
\ht Indian Polity–3
\par\drop The socio-political evolution of Indian civilisation, as far as one can
judge from the available records, passed through four historical stages, first
the simple Aryan community, then a long period of transition in which the
national life was proceeding through a considerable variety of experimental
formations in political structure and synthesis, thirdly, the definite formation of
the monarchical state coordinating all the complex elements of the communal
life of the people into regional and imperial unities, and last the era of decline
in which there was an internal arrest and stagnation and an imposition of new
cultures and systems from western Asia and Europe. The distinguishing
character of the first three periods is a remarkable solidity and stability in all
the formations and a sound and vital and powerful evolution of the life of the
people rendered slow and leisurely by this fundamental conservative stability
of the system but all the more sure in its building and living and complete in its
structure. And even in the decline this solidity opposes a strong resistance to
the process of demolition. The structure breaks up at the top under foreign
pressure, but preserves for a long time its basis, keeps, wherever it can
maintain itself against invasion, much of its characteristic system and is even
towards the end capable of attempts at revival of its form and its spirit. And
now too though the whole political system has disappeared and its last
surviving elements have been ground out of existence, the peculiar social
mind and temperament which created it remains even in the present social
stagnation, weakness, perversion and disintegration and may yet in spite of
immediate tendencies and appearances, once it is free to work again at its
own will and after its own manner, proceed not along the Western line of
evolution, but to a new creation out of its own spirit which may perhaps lead
at the call of the demand now
Page 407

vaguely beginning to appear in the advanced thought of the race towards the
inception of the third stage of communal living and a spiritual basis of human
society. In any case the long stability of its constructions and the greatness of
the life they sheltered is certainly no sign of incapacity, but rather of a
remarkable political instinct and capacity in the cultural mind of India.
\par The one principle permanent at the base of construction throughout all
the building and extension and rebuilding of the Indian polity was the principle
of an organically self-determining communal life,—self-determining not only
in the mass and by means of the machinery of the vote and a representative
body erected on the surface, representative only of the political mind of a part
of the nation, which is all that the modern system has been able to manage,
but in every pulse of its life and in each separate member of its existence. A
free synthetic communal order was its character, and the condition of liberty
it aimed at was not so much an individual as a communal freedom. In the
beginning the problem was simple enough as only two kinds of communal unit
had to be considered, the village and the clan, tribe or small regional people.
The free organic life of the first was founded on the system of the
self-governing village community and it was done with such sufficiency and
solidity that it lasted down almost to our own days resisting all the wear and
tear of time and the inroad of other systems and was only recently
steam-rollered out of existence by the ruthless and lifeless machinery of the
British bureaucratic system. The whole people living in its villages mostly on
agriculture formed in the total a single religious, social, military and political
body governing itself in its assembly, \s{samiti}, under the leadership of the
king, as yet without any clear separation of functions or class division of
labour.
\par It was the inadequacy of this system for all but the simplest form of
agricultural and pastoral life and all but the small people living within a very
limited area that compelled the problem of the evolution of a more complex
communal system and a modified and more intricate application of the
fundamental Indian principle. The agricultural and pastoral life common at
first to
Page 408

all the members of the Aryan community, \s{k\,r\,s\,taya\,h}, remained always the
large basis, but it developed an increasingly rich superstructure of commerce
and industry and numerous arts and crafts and a smaller superstructure of
specialised military and political and religious and learned occupations and
functions. The village community remained throughout the stable unit, the
firm grain or indestructible atom of the social body, but there grew up a group
life of tens and hundreds of villages, each under its head and needing its
administrative organisation, and these, as the clan grew into a large people by
conquest or coalition with others, became constituents of a kingdom or a
confederated republican nation, and these again the circles, \s{ma\,n\,dala}, of
larger kingdoms and finally of one or more great empires. The test of the
Indian genius for socio-political construction lay in the successful application
of its principle of a communal self-determined freedom and order to suit this
growing development and new order of circumstances.
\par The Indian mind evolved, to meet this necessity, the stable socio-religious
system of the four orders. Outwardly this might seem to be only a more rigid
form of the familiar social system developed naturally in most human peoples
at one time or another, a priesthood, a military and political aristocracy, a
class of artisans and free agriculturalists and traders and a proletariate of
serfs or labourers. The resemblance however is only in the externals and the
spirit of the system of Chaturvarna was different in India. In the later Vedic
and the epic times the fourfold order was at once and inextricably the
religious, social, political and economic framework of the society and within
that framework each order had its natural portion and in none of the
fundamental activities was the share or position of any of them exclusive.
This characteristic is vital to an understanding of the ancient system, but has
been obscured by false notions formed from a misunderstanding or an
exaggeration of later phenomena and of conditions mostly belonging to the
decline. The Brahmins, for example, had not a monopoly either of sacred
learning or of the highest spiritual knowledge and opportunities. At first we
see a kind of competition between the Brahmins and
Page 409

the Kshatriyas for the spiritual lead and the latter for a long time held their
own against the pretensions of the learned and sacerdotal order. The
Brahmins, however, as legists, teachers, priests, men who could give their
whole time and energy to philosophy, scholarship, the study of the sacred
writings, prevailed in the end and secured a settled and imposing
predominance. The priestly and learned class became the religious
authorities, the custodians of the sacred books and the tradition, the
interpreters of the law and Shastra, the recognised teachers in all the
departments of knowledge, the ordinary religious preceptors or gurus of the
other classes and supplied the bulk, though never the totality of the
philosophers, thinkers, literary men, scholars. The study of the Vedas and
Upanishads passed mainly into their hands, although always open to the three
higher orders; it was denied in theory to the Shudras. As a matter of fact,
however, a series of religious movements kept up even in the later days the
essential element of the old freedom, brought the highest spiritual knowledge
and opportunity to all doors and, as in the beginning we find the Vedic and
Vedantic Rishis born from all classes, we find too up to the end the yogins,
saints, spiritual thinkers, innovators and restorers, religious poets and singers,
the fountain-heads of a living spirituality and knowledge as distinguished from
traditional authority and lore, derived from all the strata of the community
down to the lowest Shudras and even the despised and oppressed outcastes.
\par The four orders grew into a fixed social hierarchy, but, leaving aside the
status of the outcastes, each had attached to it a spiritual life and utility, a
certain social dignity, an education, a principle of social and ethical honour
and a place and duty and right in the communal body. The system served
again as an automatic means of securing a fixed division of labour and a
settled economic status, the hereditary principle at first prevailing, although
here even the theory was more rigid than the practice, but none was denied
the right or opportunity of amassing wealth and making some figure in
society, administration and politics by means of influence or status in his own
order. For, finally, the social hierarchy was not at the same time a political
hierarchy:
Page 410

all the four orders had their part in the common political rights of the citizen
and in the assemblies and administrative bodies their place and their share of
influence. It may be noted too that in law and theory at least women in
ancient India, contrary to the sentiment of other ancient peoples, were not
denied civic rights, although in practice this equality was rendered nugatory
for all but a few by their social subordination to the male and their domestic
preoccupation; instances have yet survived in the existing records of women
figuring, not only as queens and administrators and even in the battlefield, a
common enough incident in Indian history, but as elected representatives on
civic bodies.
\par The whole Indian system was founded upon a close participation of all
the orders in the common life, each predominating in its own field, the
Brahmin in religion, learning and letters, the Kshatriya in war, king-craft and
interstate political action, the Vaishya in wealth-getting and productive
economical function, but none, not even the Shudra, excluded from his share
in the civic life and an effective place and voice in politics, administration,
justice. As a consequence the old Indian polity at no time developed, or at
least it did not maintain for long, those exclusive forms of class rule that have
so long and powerfully marked the political history of other countries. A
priestly theocracy, like that of Tibet, or the rule of a landed and military
aristocracy that prevailed for centuries in France and England and other
European countries or a mercantile oligarchy, as in Carthage and Venice,
were forms of government foreign to the Indian spirit. A certain political
predominance of the great Kshatriya families at a time of general war and
strife and mobile expansion, when the clans and tribes were developing into
nations and kingdoms and were still striving with each other for hegemony
and overlordship, seems to be indicated in the traditions preserved in the
Mahabharata and recurred in a cruder form in the return to the clan nation in
mediaeval Rajputana: but in ancient India this was a passing phase and the
predominance did not exclude the political and civic influence of men of the
other orders or interfere with or exercise any oppressive control over the free
Page 411

life of the various communal units. The democratic republics of the
intermediate times were in all probability polities which endeavoured to
preserve in its fullness the old principle of the active participation of the
whole body of the people in the assemblies and not democracies of the Greek
type; the oligarchical republics were clan governments or were ruled by more
limited senates drawn from the dignified elements of the society and this
afterwards developed into councils or assemblies representing all the four
orders as in the later royal councils and urban bodies. In any case the system
finally evolved was a mixed polity in which none of the orders had an undue
predominance. Accordingly we do not find in India either that struggle
between the patrician and plebeian elements of the community, the oligarchic
and the democratic idea, ending in the establishment of an absolute
monarchical rule, which characterises the troubled history of Greece and
Rome or that cycle of successive forms evolving by a strife of classes,—first
a ruling aristocracy, then replacing it by encroachment or revolution the
dominance of the moneyed and professional classes, the regime of the
bourgeois industrialising the society and governing and exploiting it in the
name of the commons or masses and, finally, the present turn towards a rule
of the proletariate of Labour,—which we see in later Europe. The Indian
mind and temperament less exclusively intellectual and vital, more intuitively
synthetic and flexible than that of the occidental peoples arrived, not certainly
at any ideal system of society and politics, but at least at a wise and stable
synthesis—not a dangerously unstable equilibrium, not a compromise or
balance—of all the natural powers and orders, an organic and vital
coordination respectful of the free functioning of all the organs of the
communal body and therefore ensured, although not against the decadence
that overtakes all human systems, at any rate against any organic disturbance
or disorder.
\par The summit of the political structure was occupied by three governing
bodies, the King in his ministerial council, the metropolitan assembly and the
general assembly of the kingdom. The members of the Council and the
ministers were drawn from all orders. The Council included a fixed number
Page 412

of Brahmin, Kshatriya, Vaishya and Shudra representatives. The Vaishyas
had indeed numerically a great preponderance, but this was a just proportion
as it corresponded to their numerical preponderance in the body of the
people: for in the early Aryan society the Vaishya order comprised not only
the merchants and small traders but the craftsmen and artisans and the
agriculturists and formed therefore the bulk of the commons, \s{vi\'sa\,h}, and
the Brahmins, Kshatriyas, Shudras, however considerable the position and
influence of the two higher orders, were later social growths and were
comparatively very inferior in number. It was only after the confusion
created by the Buddhist upheaval and the Brahminic reconstitution of the
society in the age of cultural decadence that the mass of the cultivators and
artisans and small traders sank in the greater part of India to the condition of
Shudras with a small Brahmin mass at the top and in between a slight
sprinkling of Kshatriyas and of Vaishyas. The Council, representing thus the
whole community, was the supreme executive and administrative body and its
assent and participation necessary to all the action and decrees of the
sovereign in all more important matters of government, finance, policy,
throughout the whole range of the communal interests. It was the King, the
ministers and the council who aided by a system of boards of administration
superintended and controlled all the various departments of the State action.
The power of the king undoubtedly tended to grow with time and he was
often tempted to act according to his own independent will and initiative; but
still, as long as the system was in its vigour, he could not with impunity defy
or ignore the opinion and will of the ministers and council. Even, it seems, so
powerful and strong-willed a sovereign as the great emperor Asoka was
eventually defeated in his conflict with his council and was forced practically
to abdicate his power. The ministers in council could and did often proceed to
the deposition of a recalcitrant or an incompetent monarch and replace him
by another of his family or by a new dynasty and it was in this way that there
came about several of the historic changes, as for example the dynastic
revolution from the Mauryas to the
Page 413

Sungas and again the initiation of the Kanwa line of emperors. As a matter of
constitutional theory and ordinary practice all the action of the king was in
reality that of the king in his council with the aid of his ministers and all his
personal action was only valid as depending on their assent and in so far as it
was a just and faithful discharge of the functions assigned to him by the
Dharma. And as the Council was, as it were, a quintessential power body or
action centre taking up into itself in a manageable compass, concentrating
and representing in its constitution the four orders, the main elements of the
social organism, the king too could only be the active head of this power and
not, as in an autocratic regime, himself the State or the owner of the country
and the irresponsible personal ruler of a nation of obedient subjects. The
obedience owed by the people was due to the Law, the Dharma, and to the
edicts of the King in council only as an administrative means for the service
and maintenance of the Dharma.
\par At the same time a small body like the Council subject to the immediate
and constant influence of the sovereign and his ministers might, if it had been
the sole governing body, have degenerated into an instrument of autocratic
rule. But there were two other powerful bodies in the State which
represented on a larger scale the social organism, were a nearer and closer
expression of its mind, life and will independent of the immediate regal
influence and exercising large and constant powers of administration and
administrative legislation and capable at all times of acting as a check on the
royal power, since in case of their displeasure they could either get rid of an
unpopular or oppressive king or render his administration impossible until he
made submission to the will of the people. These were the great metropolitan
and general assemblies sitting separately for the exercise each of its separate
powers and together for matters concerning the whole people.
\note{The facts about these bodies—I have selected only those that are
significant for my purpose—are taken from the luminous and scrupulously
documented contribution of Mr. Jayaswal to the subject.} The Paura or
metropolitan civic
Page 414

assembly sat constantly in the capital town of the kingdom or empire—and
under the imperial system there seem also to have been similar lesser bodies
in the chief towns of the provinces, survivals of the assemblies that governed
them when they were themselves capitals of independent kingdoms—and
was constituted of representatives of the city guilds and the various caste
bodies belonging to all the orders of the society or at least to the three lower
orders. The guilds and caste bodies were themselves organic self-governing
constituents of the community both in the country and the city and the
supreme assembly of the citizens was not an artificial but an organic
representation of the collective totality of the whole organism as it existed
within the limits of the metropolis. It governed all the life of the city, acting
directly or through subordinate lesser assemblies and administrative boards or
committees of five, ten or more members, and, both by regulations and
decrees which the guilds were bound to obey and by direct administration,
controlled and supervised the commercial, industrial, financial and municipal
affairs of the civic community. But in addition it was a power that had to be
consulted and could take action in the wider affairs of the kingdom,
sometimes separately and sometimes in cooperation with the general
assembly, and its constant presence and functioning at the capital made it a
force that had always to be reckoned with by the king and his ministers and
their council. In a case of conflict with the royal ministers or governors even
the distant civic parliaments in the provinces could make their displeasure felt
if offended in matters of their position or privileges or discontented with the
king's administrators and could compel the withdrawal of the offending
officer.
\par The general assembly was similarly an organic representation of the
mind and will of the whole country outside the metropolis; for it was
composed of the deputies, elective heads or chief men of the townships and
villages. A certain plutocratic element seems to have entered into its
composition, as it was principally recruited from the wealthier men of the
represented communities, and it was therefore something of the nature of an
assembly of the commons not of an entirely democratic type,
Page 415

—although unlike all but the most recent modern parliaments it included
Shudras as well as Kshatriyas and Vaishyas,—but still a sufficiently faithful
expression of the life and mind of the people. It was not however a supreme
parliament: for it had ordinarily no fundamental legislative powers, any more
than had the king and council or the metropolitan assembly, but only of
decree and regulation. Its business was to serve as a direct instrument of the
will of the people in the coordination of the various activities of the life of the
nation, to see to the right direction of these and to the securing of the general
order and welfare of the commerce, industry, agriculture, social and political
life of the nation, to pass decrees and regulations to that purpose and secure
privileges and facilities from the king and his council, to give or withhold the
assent of the people to the actions of the sovereign and, if need be, to oppose
him actively and prevent misgovernment or end it by the means open to the
people's representatives. The joint session of the metropolitan and general
assemblies was consulted in matters of succession, could depose the
sovereign, alter the succession at his death, transfer the throne outside the
reigning family, act sometimes as a supreme court of law in cases having a
political tincture, cases of treason or of miscarriage of justice. The royal
resolutions on any matter of State policy were promulgated to these
assemblies and their assent had to be taken in all matters involving special
taxation, war, sacrifice, large schemes of irrigation etc., and all questions of
vital interest to the country. The two bodies seem to have sat constantly, for
matters came up daily from them to the sovereign: their acts were registered
by the king and had automatically the effect of law. It is clear indeed from a
total review of their rights and activities that they were partners in the
sovereignty and its powers were inherent in them and even those could be
exercised by them on extraordinary occasions which were not normally
within their purview. It is significant that Asoka in his attempt to alter the
Dharma of the community, proceeded not merely by his royal decree but by
discussion with the Assembly. The ancient description seems therefore to
have been thoroughly justified which characterised the two bodies as
Page 416

executors of the kingdom's activities and at need the instruments of
opposition to the king's government.
\par It is not clear when these great institutions went out of existence,
whether before the Mahomedan invasion or as a result of the foreign
conquest. Any collapse of the system at the top leaving a gulf between the
royal government, which would grow more autocratic by its isolation and in
sole control of the larger national affairs, and the other constituents of the
socio-political body each carrying on its own internal affairs, as was to the
end the case with the village communities, but not in any living relation with
the higher State matters, would obviously be, in an organisation of complex
communal freedom where coordination of the life was imperatively needed, a
great cause of weakness. In any case the invasion from Central Asia,
bringing in a tradition of personal and autocratic rule unfamiliar with these
restraints would immediately destroy such bodies, or their remnants or
survivals wherever they still existed, and this happened throughout the whole
of Northern India. The Indian political system was still maintained for many
centuries in the south, but the public assemblies which went on existing there
do not seem to have been of the same constitution as the ancient political
bodies, but were rather some of the other communal organisations and
assemblies of which these were a coordination and supreme instrument of
control. These inferior assemblies included bodies originally of a political
character, once the supreme governing institutions of the clan nation,
\s{kula}, and the republic, \s{ga\,na}. Under the new dispensation they
remained in existence, but lost their supreme powers and could only
administer with a subordinate and restricted authority the affairs of their
constituent communities. The \s{kula} or clan family persisted, even after it
had lost its political character, as a socio-religious institution, especially among
the Kshatriyas, and preserved the tradition of its social and religious law,
\s{kula-dharma}, and in some cases its communal assembly,
\s{kula-sa\.ngha}. The public assemblies that we find even in quite recent
times filling the role of the old general assembly in Southern India, more than
one coexisting and acting separately or in unison, appear to have been
variations
Page 417

on this type of body. In Rajputana also the clan family, \s{kula}, recovered its
political character and action, but in another form and without the ancient
institutions and finer cultural temper, although they preserved in a high degree
the Kshatriya dharma of courage, chivalry, magnanimity and honour.
\par A stronger permanent element in the Indian communal system, one that
grew up in the frame of the four orders—in the end even replacing it—and
acquired an extraordinary vitality, persistence and predominant importance
was the historic and still tenacious though decadent institution of caste,
\s{j\=ati}. Originally this rose from subdivisions of the four orders that grew up
in each order under the stress of various forces. The subdivision of the
Brahmin castes was mainly due to religious, socio-religious and ceremonial
causes, but there were also regional and local divisions: the Kshatriyas
remained for the most part one united order, though divided into \s{kulas}.
On the other hand the Vaishya and Shudra orders split up into innumerable
castes under the necessity of a subdivision of economic functions on the basis
of the hereditary principle. Apart from the increasingly rigid application of the
hereditary principle, this settled subdivision of function could well enough
have been secured, as in other countries, by a guild system and in the towns
we do find a vigorous and efficient guild system in existence. But the guild
system afterwards fell into desuetude and the more general institution of
caste became the one basis of economic function everywhere. The caste in
town and village was a separate communal unit, at once religious, social and
economic, and decided its religious, social and other questions, carried on its
caste affairs and exercised jurisdiction over its members in a perfect freedom
from all outside interference: only on fundamental questions of the Dharma
the Brahmins were referred to for an authoritative interpretation or decision
as custodians of the Shastra. As with the \s{kula}, each caste had its caste
law and rule of living and conduct, \s{j\=ati-dharma}, and its caste communal
assembly, \s{j\=ati-sa\.ngha}. As the Indian polity in all its institutions was
founded on a communal and not on an individualistic basis, the caste also
counted in the political and administrative functioning of the
Page 418

kingdom. The guilds equally were self-functioning mercantile and industrial
communal units, assembled for the discussion and administration of their
affairs and had besides their united assemblies which seem at one time to
have been the governing urban bodies. These guild governments, if they may
so be called,—for they were more than municipalities,—disappeared
afterwards into the more general urban body which represented an organic
unity of both the guilds and the caste assemblies of all the orders. The castes
as such were not directly represented in the general assembly of the
kingdom, but they had their place in the administration of local affairs.
\par The village community and the township were the most tangibly stable
basis of the whole system; but these, it must be noted, were not solely
territorial units or a convenient mechanism for electoral, administrative or
other useful social and political purposes, but always true communal unities
with an organic life of their own that functioned in its own power and not
merely as a subordinate part of the machinery of the State. The village
community has been described as a little village republic, and the description
is hardly an exaggeration: for each village was within its own limits
autonomous and self-sufficient, governed by its own elected Panchayats and
elected or hereditary officers, satisfying its own needs, providing for its own
education, police, tribunals, all its economic necessities and functions,
managing itself its own life as an independent and self-governing unit. The
villages carried on also their affairs with each other by combinations of
various kinds and there were too groups of villages under elected or
hereditary heads and forming therefore, though in a less closely organised
fashion, a natural body. But the townships in India were also in a hardly less
striking way autonomous and self-governing bodies, ruled by their own
assembly and committees with an elective system and the use of the vote,
managing their own affairs in their own right and sending like the villages
their representative men to the general assembly of the kingdom. The
administration of these urban governments included all works contributing to
the material or other welfare of the citizens, police, judicial cases, public
works and the
Page 419

charge of sacred and public places, registration, the collection of municipal
taxes and all matters relating to trade, industry and commerce. If the village
community can be described as a little village republic, the constitution of the
township can equally be described as a larger urban republic. It is significant
that the Naigama and Paura assemblies,—the guild governments and the
metropolitan bodies,—had the privilege of striking coins of their own, a power
otherwise exercised only by the monarchical heads of States and the
republics.
\par Another kind of community must be noted, those which had no political
existence, but were yet each in its own kind a self-governing body; for they
illustrate the strong tendency of Indian life to throw itself in all its
manifestations into a closely communal form of existence. One example is
the joint family, prevalent everywhere in India and only now breaking down
under the pressure of modern conditions, of which the two fundamental
principles were first a communal holding of the property by the agnates and
their families and, as far as possible, an undivided communal life under the
management of the head of the family and, secondly, the claim of each male
to an equal portion in the share of his father, a portion due to him in case of
separation and division of the estate. This communal unity with the persistent
separate right of the individual is an example of the synthetic turn of the
Indian mind and life, its recognition of fundamental tendencies and its attempt
to harmonise them even if they seemed in their norm of practice to be
contradictory to each other. It is the same synthetic turn as that which in all
parts of the Indian socio-political system tended to fuse together in different
ways the theocratic, the monarchic and aristocratic, the plutocratic and the
democratic tendencies in a whole which bore the characteristics of none of
them nor was yet an accommodation of them or amalgamation whether by a
system of checks and balances or by an intellectually constructed synthesis,
but rather a natural outward form of the inborn tendencies and character of
the complex social mind and temperament.
\par At the other end, forming the ascetic and purely spiritual extreme of the
Indian life-mind, we find the religious community
Page 420

and, again, this too takes a communal shape. The original Vedic society had
no place for any Church or religious community or ecclesiastical order, for in
its system the body of the people formed a single socio-religious whole with
no separation into religious and secular, layman and cleric, and in spite of
later developments the Hindu religion has held, in the whole or at least as the
basis, to this principle. On the other hand an increasing ascetic tendency that
came in time to distinguish the religious from the mundane life and tended to
create the separate religious community, was confirmed by the rise of the
creeds and disciplines of the Buddhists and the Jains. The Buddhist monastic
order was the first development of the complete figure of the organised
religious community. Here we find that Buddha simply applied the known
principles of the Indian society and polity to the ascetic life. The order he
created was intended to be a \s{dharma-sa\.ngha}, and each monastery a
religious commune living the life of a united communal body which existed as
the expression and was based in all the rules, features, structure of its life on
the maintenance of the Dharma as it was understood by the Buddhists. This
was, as we can at once see, precisely the principle and theory of the whole
Hindu society, but given here the higher intensity possible to the spiritual life
and a purely religious body. It managed its affairs too like the Indian social
and political communal unities. An assembly of the order discussed debatable
questions of the Dharma and its application and proceeded by vote as in the
meeting-halls of the republics, but it was subject still to a limiting control
intended to avoid the possible evils of a too purely democratic method. The
monastic system once thus firmly established was taken over from Buddhism
by the orthodox religion, but without its elaborate organisation. These religious
communities tended, wherever they could prevail against the older Brahminic
system, as in the order created by Shankaracharya, to become a sort of
ecclesiastical head to the lay body of the community, but they arrogated to
themselves no political position and the struggle between Church and State is
absent from the political history of India.
Page 421

\par It is clear therefore that the whole life of ancient India retained even in
the time of the great kingdoms and empires its first principle and essential
working and its social polity remained fundamentally a complex system of
self-determined and self-governing communal bodies. The evolution of an
organised State authority supervening on this system was necessitated in
India as elsewhere partly by the demand of the practical reason for a more
stringent and scientifically efficient coordination than was possible except in
small areas to the looser natural coordination of life, and more imperatively by
the need of a systematised military aggression and defence and international
action concentrated in the hands of a single central authority. An extension of
the free republican State might have sufficed to meet the former demand, for
it had the potentiality and the necessary institutions, but the method of the
monarchical State with its more constricted and easily tangible centrality
presented a more ready and manageable device and a more facile and
apparently efficient machinery. And for the external task, involving almost
from the commencement the supremely difficult age-long problem of the
political unification of India, then a continent rather than a country, the
republican system, more suited to strength in defence than for aggression,
proved in spite of its efficient military organisation to be inadequate. It was,
therefore, in India as elsewhere, the strong form of the monarchical State
that prevailed finally and swallowed up the others. At the same time the
fidelity of the Indian mind to its fundamental intuitions and ideals preserved
the basis of communal self-government natural to the temperament of the
people, prevented the monarchical State from developing into an autocracy or
exceeding its proper functions and stood successfully in the way of its
mechanising the life of the society. It is only in the long decline that we find
the free institutions that stood between the royal government and the
self-determining communal life of the people either tending to disappear or
else to lose much of their ancient power and vigour and the evils of personal
government, of a bureaucracy of scribes and officials and of a too
preponderant centralised authority commencing to manifest in some sensible
measure.
Page 422

As long as the ancient traditions of the Indian polity remained and in
proportion as they continued to be vital and effective, these evils remained
either sporadic and occasional or could not assume any serious proportions. It
was the combination of foreign invasion and conquest with the slow decline
and final decadence of the ancient Indian culture that brought about the
collapse of considerable parts of the old structure and the degradation and
disintegration, with no sufficient means for revival or new creation, of the
socio-political life of the people.
\par At the height of its evolution and in the great days of Indian civilisation
we find an admirable political system efficient in the highest degree and very
perfectly combining communal self-government with stability and order. The
State carried on its work administrative, judicial, financial and protective
without destroying or encroaching on the rights and free activities of the
people and its constituent bodies in the same departments. The royal courts in
capital and country were the supreme judicial authority coordinating the
administration of justice throughout the kingdom, but they did not unduly
interfere with the judicial powers entrusted to their own courts by the village
and urban communes and, even, the regal system associated with itself the
guild, caste and family courts, working as an ample means of arbitration and
only insisted on its own exclusive control of the more serious criminal
offences. A similar respect was shown to the administrative and financial
powers of the village and urban communes. The king's governors and
officials in town and country existed side by side with the civic governors and
officials and the communal heads and officers appointed by the people and its
assemblies. The State did not interfere with the religious liberty or the
established economic and social life of the nation; it confined itself to the
maintenance of social order and the provision of a needed supervision,
support, coordination and facilities for the rich and powerful functioning of all
the national activities. It understood too always and magnificently fulfilled its
opportunities as a source of splendid and munificent stimulation to the
architecture, art, culture, scholarship, literature already created by the
communal mind of India. In the person of the
Page 423

monarch it was the dignified and powerful head and in the system of his
administration the supreme instrument—neither an arbitrary autocracy or
bureaucracy, nor a machine oppressing or replacing life—of a great and
stable civilisation and a free and living people.
Page 424

\par
\hn XXIV
\par
\ht Indian Polity–4
\par\drop A right knowledge of the facts and a right understanding of the
character and principle of the Indian socio-political system disposes at once
of the contention of occidental critics that the Indian mind, even if remarkable
in metaphysics, religion, art and literature was inapt for the organisation of
life, inferior in the works of the practical intelligence and, especially, that it
was sterile in political experiment and its record empty of sound political
construction, thinking and action. On the contrary, Indian civilisation evolved
an admirable political system, built solidly and with an enduring soundness,
combined with a remarkable skill the monarchical, democratic and other
principles and tendencies to which the mind of man has leaned in its efforts
of civic construction and escaped at the same time the excess of the
mechanising turn which is the defect of the modern European State. I shall
consider afterwards the objections that can be made to it from the
evolutionary standpoint of the West and its idea of progress.
\par But there is another side of politics on which it may be said that the
Indian political mind has registered nothing but failure. The organisation it
developed may have been admirable for stability and effective administration
and the securing of communal order and liberties and the well-being of the
people under ancient conditions, but even if its many peoples were each of
them separately self-governed, well governed and prosperous and the country
at large assured in the steady functioning of a highly developed civilisation
and culture, yet that organisation failed to serve for the national and political
unification of India and failed in the end to secure it against foreign invasion,
the disruption of its institutions and an agelong servitude. The political system
of a society has to be judged, no doubt first and foremost by the stability,
prosperity, internal freedom and order
Page 425

it ensures to the people, but also it must be judged by the security it erects
against other States, its unity and power of defence and aggression against
external rivals and enemies. It is not perhaps altogether to the credit of
humanity that it should be so and a nation or people that is inferior in this kind
of political strength, as were the ancient Greeks and mediaeval Italians, may
be spiritually and culturally far superior to its conquerors and may well have
contributed more to a true human progress than successful military States,
aggressive communities, predatory empires. But the life of man is still
predominatingly vital and moved therefore by the tendencies of expansion,
possession, aggression, mutual struggle for absorption and dominant survival
which are the first law of life, and a collective mind and consciousness that
gives a constant proof of incapacity for aggression and defence and does not
organise the centralised and efficient unity necessary to its own safety, is
clearly one that in the political field falls far short of the first order. India has
never been nationally and politically one. India was for close on a thousand
years swept by barbaric invasions and for almost another thousand years in
servitude to successive foreign masters. It is clear therefore that judgment of
political incapacity must be passed against the Indian people.
\par Here again the first necessity is to get rid of exaggerations, to form a
clear idea of the actual facts and their significance and understand the
tendencies and principles involved in the problem that admittedly throughout
the long history of India escaped a right solution. And first if the greatness of
a people and a civilisation is to be reckoned by its military aggressiveness, its
scale of foreign conquest, its success in warfare against other nations and the
triumph of its organised acquisitive and predatory instincts, its irresistible push
towards annexation and exploitation, it must be confessed that India ranks
perhaps the lowest in the list of the world's great peoples. At no time does
India seem to have been moved towards an aggressive military and political
expansion beyond her own borders; no epic of world dominion, no great tale
of far-borne invasion or expanding colonial empire has ever been written in
the tale of Indian achievement. The sole great
Page 426

endeavour of expansion, of conquest, of invasion she attempted was the
expansion of her culture, the invasion and conquest of the Eastern world by
the Buddhistic idea and the penetration of her spirituality, art and
thought-forces. And this was an invasion of peace and not of war, for to
spread a spiritual civilisation by force and physical conquest, the vaunt or the
excuse of modern imperialism, would have been uncongenial to the ancient
cast of her mind and temperament and the idea underlying her Dharma. A
series of colonising expeditions carried indeed Indian blood and Indian culture
to the islands of the archipelago, but the ships that set out from both the
eastern and western coast were not fleets of invaders missioned to annex
those outlying countries to an Indian empire but of exiles or adventurers
carrying with them to yet uncultured peoples Indian religion, architecture, art,
poetry, thought, life, manners. The idea of empire and even of world-empire
was not absent from the Indian mind, but its world was the Indian world and
the object the founding of the imperial unity of its peoples.
\par This idea, the sense of this necessity, a constant urge towards its
realisation is evident throughout the whole course of Indian history from
earlier Vedic times through the heroic period represented by the traditions of
the Ramayana and Mahabharata and the effort of the imperial Mauryas and
Guptas up to the Mogul unification and the last ambition of the Peshwas, until
there came the final failure and the levelling of all the conflicting forces under
a foreign yoke, a uniform subjection in place of the free unity of a free
people. The question then is whether the tardiness, the difficulty, the
fluctuating movements of the process and the collapse of the long effort were
due to a fundamental incapacity in the civilisation or in the political
consciousness and ability of the people or to other forces. A great deal has
been said and written about the inability of Indians to unite, the want of a
common patriotism—now only being created, it is said, by the influence of
Western culture—and the divisions imposed by religion and caste. Admitting
even in their full degree the force of these strictures,—all of them are not
altogether true or rightly stated or vitally applicable to the matter,—they are
only
Page 427

symptoms and we have still to seek for the deeper causes.
\par The reply made for the defence is usually that India is practically a
continent almost as large as Europe containing a great number of peoples and
the difficulties of the problem have been as great or at least almost as
considerable. And if then it is no proof of the insufficiency of Western
civilisation or of the political incapacity of the European peoples that the idea
of European unity should still remain an ineffective phantasm on the ideal
plane and to this day impossible to realise in practice, it is not just to apply a
different system of values to the much more clear ideal of unity or at least of
unification, the persistent attempt at its realisation and the frequent near
approach to success that marked the history of the Indian peoples. There is
some force in the contention, but it is not in the form entirely apposite, for the
analogy is far from perfect and the conditions were not quite of the same
order. The peoples of Europe are nations very sharply divided from each
other in their collective personality, and their spiritual unity in the Christian
religion or even their cultural unity in a common European civilisation, never
so real and complete as the ancient spiritual and cultural unity of India, was
also not the very centre of their life, not its basis or firm ground of existence,
not its supporting earth but only its general air or circumambient atmosphere.
Their base of existence lay in the political and economic life which was
strongly separate in each country, and it was the very strength of the political
consciousness in the Western mind that kept Europe a mass of divided and
constantly warring nations. It is only the increasing community of political
movements and the now total economic interdependence of the whole of
Europe that has at last created not any unity, but a nascent and still
ineffective League of Nations struggling vainly to apply the mentality born of
an agelong separatism to the common interests of the European peoples. But
in India at a very early time the spiritual and cultural unity was made
complete and became the very stuff of the life of all this great surge of
humanity between the Himalayas and the two seas. The peoples of ancient
India were never so much distinct nations sharply divided from each other by
a separate political
Page 428

and economic life as sub-peoples of a great spiritual and cultural nation itself
firmly separated, physically, from other countries by the seas and the
mountains and from other nations by its strong sense of difference, its
peculiar common religion and culture. The creation of a political unity,
however vast the area and however many the practical difficulties, ought
therefore to have been effected more easily than could possibly be the unity
of Europe. The cause of the failure must be sought deeper down and we
shall find that it lay in a dissidence between the manner in which the problem
was or ought to have been envisaged and the actual turn given to the
endeavour and in the latter a contradiction of the peculiar mentality of the
people.
\par The whole basis of the Indian mind is its spiritual and inward turn, its
propensity to seek the things of the spirit and the inner being first and
foremost and to look at all else as secondary, dependent, to be handled and
determined in the light of the higher knowledge and as an expression, a
preliminary, field or aid or at least a pendent to the deeper spiritual aim,—a
tendency therefore to create whatever it had to create first on the inner plane
and afterwards in its other aspects. This mentality and this consequent
tendency to create from within outwards being given, it was inevitable that
the unity India first created for herself should be the spiritual and cultural
oneness. It could not be, to begin with, a political unification effected by an
external rule centralised, imposed or constructed, as was done in Rome or
ancient Persia, by a conquering kingdom or the genius of a military and
organising people. It cannot, I think, justly be said that this was a mistake or a
proof of the unpractical turn of the Indian mind and that the single political
body should have been created first and afterwards the spiritual unity could
have securely grown up in the vast body of an Indian national empire. The
problem that presented itself at the beginning was that of a huge area
containing more than a hundred kingdoms, clans, peoples, tribes, races, in this
respect another Greece, but a Greece on an enormous scale, almost as large
as modern Europe. As in Greece a cultural Hellenic unity was necessary to
create a fundamental feeling of oneness, here too and much more
imperatively
Page 429

a conscious spiritual and cultural unity of all these peoples was the first, the
indispensable condition without which no enduring unity could be possible.
The instinct of the Indian mind and of its great Rishis and founders of its
culture was sound in this matter. And even if we suppose that an outward
imperial unity like that of the Roman world could have been founded among
the peoples of early India by military and political means, we must not forget
that the Roman unity did not endure, that even the unity of ancient Italy
founded by the Roman conquest and organisation did not endure, and it is not
likely that a similar attempt in the vast reaches of India without the previous
spiritual and cultural basis would have been of an enduring character. It
cannot be said either, even if the emphasis on spiritual and cultural unity be
pronounced to have been too engrossing or excessive and the insistence on
political and external unity too feeble, that the effect of this precedence has
been merely disastrous and without any advantage. It is due to this original
peculiarity, to this indelible spiritual stamp, to this underlying oneness amidst
all diversities that if India is not yet a single organised political nation, she still
survives and is still India.
\par After all the spiritual and cultural is the only enduring unity and it is by a
persistent mind and spirit much more than by an enduring physical body and
outward organisation that the soul of a people survives. This is a truth the
positive Western mind may be unwilling to understand or concede, and yet its
proofs are written across the whole story of the ages. The ancient nations,
contemporaries of India, and many younger born than she are dead and only
their monuments left behind them. Greece and Egypt exist only on the map
and in name, for it is not the soul of Hellas or the deeper nation-soul that built
Memphis which we now find at Athens or at Cairo. Rome imposed a political
and a purely outward cultural unity on the Mediterranean peoples, but their
living spiritual and cultural oneness she could not create, and therefore the
east broke away from the west, Africa kept no impress of the Roman
interlude, and even the western nations still called Latin could offer no living
resistance to barbarian invaders and had to be reborn
Page 430

by the infusion of a foreign vitality to become modern Italy, Spain and
France. But India still lives and keeps the continuity of her inner mind and
soul and spirit with the India of the ages. Invasion and foreign rule, the Greek,
the Parthian and the Hun, the robust vigour of Islam, the levelling steam-roller
heaviness of the British occupation and the British system, the enormous
pressure of the Occident have not been able to drive or crush the ancient soul
out of the body her Vedic Rishis made for her. At every step, under every
calamity and attack and domination, she has been able to resist and survive
either with an active or a passive resistance. And this she was able to do in
her great days by her spiritual solidarity and power of assimilation and
reaction, expelling all that would not be absorbed, absorbing all that could not
be expelled, and even after the beginning of the decline she was still able to
survive by the same force, abated but not slayable, retreating and maintaining
for a time her ancient political system in the south, throwing up under the
pressure of Islam Rajput and Sikh and Mahratta to defend her ancient self
and its idea, persisting passively where she could not resist actively,
condemning to decay each empire that could not answer her riddle or make
terms with her, awaiting always the day of her revival. And even now it is a
similar phenomenon that we see in process before our eyes. And what shall
we say then of the surpassing vitality of the civilisation that could accomplish
this miracle and of the wisdom of those who built its foundation not on things
external but on the spirit and the inner mind and made a spiritual and cultural
oneness the root and stock of her existence and not solely its fragile flower,
the eternal basis and not the perishable superstructure?
\par But spiritual unity is a large and flexible thing and does not insist like the
political and external on centralisation and uniformity; rather it lives diffused
in the system and permits readily a great diversity and freedom of life. Here
we touch on the secret of the difficulty in the problem of unifying ancient
India. It could not be done by the ordinary means of a centralised uniform
imperial State crushing out all that made for free divergence, local
autonomies, established communal \NH liberties,
Page 431

and each time that an attempt was made in this direction, it has failed after
however long a term of apparent success, and we might even say that the
guardians of India's destiny wisely compelled it to fail that her inner spirit
might not perish and her soul barter for an engine of temporary security the
deep sources of its life. The ancient mind of India had the intuition of its
need; its idea of empire was a uniting rule that respected every existing
regional and communal liberty, that unnecessarily crushed out no living
autonomy, that effected a synthesis of her life and not a mechanical oneness.
Afterwards the conditions under which such a solution might securely have
evolved and found its true means and form and basis, disappeared and there
was instead an attempt to establish a single administrative empire. That
endeavour, dictated by the pressure of an immediate and external necessity,
failed to achieve a complete success in spite of its greatness and splendour. It
could not do so because it followed a trend that was not eventually
compatible with the true turn of the Indian spirit. It has been seen that the
underlying principle of the Indian politico-social system was a synthesis of
communal autonomies, the autonomy of the village, of the town and capital
city, of the caste, guild, family, \s{kula}, religious community, regional unit.
The state or kingdom or confederated republic was a means of holding
together and synthetising in a free and living organic system these
autonomies. The imperial problem was to synthetise again these states,
peoples, nations, effecting their unity but respecting their autonomy, into a
larger free and living organism. A system had to be found that would
maintain peace and oneness among its members, secure safety against
external attack and totalise the free play and evolution, in its unity and
diversity, in the uncoerced and active life of all its constituent communal and
regional units, of the soul and body of Indian civilisation and culture, the
functioning on a grand and total scale of the Dharma.
\par This was the sense in which the earlier mind of India understood the
problem. The administrative empire of later times accepted it only partially,
but its trend was, very slowly and almost subconsciously, what the
centralising tendency must \NH always be,
Page 432

if not actively to destroy, still to wear down and weaken the vigour of the
subordinated autonomies. The consequence was that whenever the central
authority was weak, the persistent principle of regional autonomy essential to
the life of India reasserted itself to the detriment of the artificial unity
established and not, as it should have done, for the harmonious intensification
and freer but still united functioning of the total life. The imperial monarchy
tended also to wear down the vigour of the free assemblies, and the result
was that the communal units instead of being elements of a united strength
became isolated and dividing factors. The village community preserved
something of its vigour, but had no living connection with the supreme
authority and, losing the larger national sense, was willing to accept any
indigenous or foreign rule that respected its own self-sufficient narrow life.
The religious communities came to be imbued with the same spirit. The
castes, multiplying themselves without any true necessity or true relation to
the spiritual or the economic need of the country, became mere sacrosanct
conventional divisions, a power for isolation and not, as they originally were,
factors of a harmonious functioning of the total life-synthesis. It is not true
that the caste divisions were in ancient India an obstacle to the united life of
the people or that they were even in later times an active power for political
strife and disunion,—except indeed at the end, in the final decline, and
especially during the later history of the Mahratta confederation; but they did
become a passive force of social division and of a stagnant
compartmentalism obstructive to the reconstitution of a free and actively
united life.
\par The evils that attended the system did not all manifest themselves with
any power before the Mahomedan invasions, but they must have been
already there in their beginning and they increased rapidly under the
conditions created by the Pathan and the Mogul empires. These later imperial
systems however brilliant and powerful, suffered still more than their
predecessors from the evils of centralisation owing to their autocratic
character and were constantly breaking down from the same tendency of the
regional life of India to assert itself against an artificial
Page 433

unitarian regime, while, because they had no true, living and free relation with
the life of the people, they proved unable to create the common patriotism
which would have effectively secured them against the foreign invader. And
in the end there has come a mechanical Western rule that has crushed out all
the still existing communal or regional autonomies and substituted the dead
unity of a machine. But again in the reaction against it we see the same
ancient tendencies reviving, the tendency towards a reconstitution of the
regional life of the Indian peoples, the demand for a provincial autonomy
founded on true subdivisions of race and language, a harking back of the
Indian mind to the ideal of the lost village community as a living unit
necessary to the natural life of the national body and, not yet reborn but dimly
beginning to dawn on the more advanced minds, a truer idea of the communal
basis proper to Indian life and the renovation and reconstruction of Indian
society and politics on a spiritual foundation.
\par The failure to achieve Indian unity of which the invasions and the final
subjection to the foreigner were the consequence, arose therefore at once
from the magnitude and from the peculiarity of the task, because the easy
method of a centralised empire could not truly succeed in India, while yet it
seemed the only device possible and was attempted again and again with a
partial success that seemed for the time and a long time to justify it, but
always with an eventual failure. I have suggested that the early mind of India
better understood the essential character of the problem. The Vedic Rishis
and their successors made it their chief work to found a spiritual basis of
Indian life and to effect the spiritual and cultural unity of the many races and
peoples of the peninsula. But they were not blind to the necessity of a
political unification. Observing the constant tendency of the clan life of the
Aryan peoples to consolidate under confederacies and hegemonies of varying
proportions, \s{vair\=ajya}, \s{s\=amr\=ajya}, they saw that to follow this line to its
full conclusion was the right way and evolved therefore the ideal of the
Chakravarti, a uniting imperial rule, uniting without destroying the \NH
autonomy of India's many kingdoms and peoples, from sea to sea. This
Page 434

ideal they supported, like everything else in Indian life, with a spiritual and
religious sanction, set up as its outward symbol the Aswamedha and
Rajasuya sacrifices, and made it the dharma of a powerful King, his royal
and religious duty, to attempt the fulfilment of the ideal. He was not allowed
by the Dharma to destroy the liberties of the peoples who came under his
sway nor to dethrone or annihilate their royal houses or replace their archons
by his officials and governors. His function was to establish a suzerain power
possessed of sufficient military strength to preserve internal peace and to
combine at need the full forces of the country. And to this elementary
function came to be added the ideal of the fulfilment and maintenance under
a strong uniting hand of the Indian dharma, the right functioning of the
spiritual, religious, ethical and social culture of India.
\par The full flowering of the ideal is seen in the great epics. The
Mahabharata is the record of a legendary or, it may be, a historic attempt to
establish such an empire, a \s{dharmar\=ajya} or kingdom of the Dharma.
There the ideal is pictured as so imperative and widely acknowledged that
even the turbulent Shishupala is represented as motiving his submission and
attendance at the Rajasuya sacrifice on the ground that Yudhisthira was
carrying out an action demanded by the Dharma. And in the Ramayana we
have an idealised picture of such a Dharmarajya, a settled universal empire.
Here too it is not an autocratic despotism but a universal monarchy supported
by a free assembly of the city and provinces and of all the classes that is held
up as the ideal, an enlargement of the monarchical state synthetising the
communal autonomies of the Indian system and maintaining the law and
constitution of the Dharma. The ideal of conquest held up is not a destructive
and predatory invasion annihilating the organic freedom and the political and
social institutions and exploiting the economic resources of the conquered
peoples, but a sacrificial progression bringing with it a trial of military strength
of which the result was easily accepted because defeat entailed neither
humiliation nor servitude and suffering but merely a strengthening adhesion to
a suzerain power concerned only with establishing the visible unity of the
nation and the Dharma. The
Page 435

ideal of the ancient Rishis is clear and their purpose: it is evident that they
saw the military and political utility and necessity of a unification of the
divided and warring peoples of the land, but they saw also that it ought not to
be secured at the expense of the free life of the regional peoples or of the
communal liberties and not therefore by a centralised monarchy or a rigidly
unitarian imperial State. A hegemony or confederacy under an imperial head
would be the nearest Western analogy to the conception they sought to
impose on the minds of the people.
\par There is no historical evidence that this ideal was ever successfully
carried into execution, although the epic tradition speaks of several such
empires preceding the Dharmarajya of Yudhisthira. At the time of Buddha
and later when Chandragupta and Chanakya were building the first historic
Indian empire, the country was still covered with free kingdoms and republics
and there was no united empire to meet the great raid of Alexander. It is
evident that if any hegemony had previously existed, it had failed to discover
a means or system of enduring permanence. This might however have
evolved if time had been given, but a serious change had meanwhile taken
place which made it urgently necessary to find an immediate solution. The
historic weakness of the Indian peninsula has always been until modern times
its vulnerability through the north-western passes. This weakness did not
exist so long as ancient India extended northward far beyond the Indus and
the powerful kingdoms of Gandhara and Vahlika presented a firm bulwark
against foreign invasion. But they had now gone down before the organised
Persian empire and from this time forward the trans-Indus countries, ceasing
to be part of India, ceased also to be its protection and became instead the
secure base for every successive invader. The inroad of Alexander brought
home the magnitude of the danger to the political mind of India and from this
time we see poets, writers, political thinkers constantly upholding the imperial
ideal or thinking out the means of its realisation. The immediate practical
result was the rise of the empire founded with remarkable swiftness by the
statesmanship of Chanakya and constantly maintained or restored through
Page 436

eight or nine centuries, in spite of periods of weakness and incipient
disintegration, successively by the Maurya, Sunga, Kanwa, Andhra and
Gupta dynasties. The history of this empire, its remarkable organisation,
administration, public works, opulence, magnificent culture and the vigour, the
brilliance, the splendid fruitfulness of the life of the peninsula under its shelter
emerges only from scattered insufficient records, but even so it ranks among
the greatest constructed and maintained by the genius of the earth's great
peoples. India has no reason, from this point of view, to be anything but proud
of her ancient achievement in empire-building or to submit to the hasty
verdict that denies to her antique civilisation a strong practical genius or high
political virtue.
\par At the same time this empire suffered by the inevitable haste, violence
and artificiality of its first construction to meet a pressing need, because that
prevented it from being the deliberate, natural and steady evolution in the old
solid Indian manner of the truth of her deepest ideal. The attempt to establish
a centralised imperial monarchy brought with it not a free synthesis but a
breaking down of regional autonomies. Although according to the Indian
principle their institutes and customs were respected and at first even their
political institutions not wholly annulled, at any rate in many cases, but
brought within the imperial system, these could not really flourish under the
shadow of the imperial centralisation. The free peoples of the ancient Indian
world began to disappear, their broken materials serving afterwards to create
the now existing Indian races. And I think it can be concluded on the whole
that although for a long time the great popular assemblies continued to remain
in vigour, their function in the end tended to become more mechanical and
their vitality to decline and suffer. The urban republics too tended to become
more and more mere municipalities of the organised kingdom or empire. The
habits of mind created by the imperial centralisation and the weakening or
disappearance of the more dignified free popular institutions of the past
created a sort of spiritual gap, on one side of which were the administered
content with any government that gave them security and
Page 437

did not interfere too much with their religion, life and customs and on the
other the imperial administration beneficent and splendid, no doubt, but no
longer that living head of a free and living people contemplated by the earlier
and the true political mind of India. These results became prominent and
were final only with the decline, but they were there in seed and rendered
almost inevitable by the adoption of a mechanical method of unification. The
advantages gained were those of a stronger and more coherent military
action and a more regularised and uniform administration, but these could not
compensate in the end for the impairment of the free organic diversified life
which was the true expression of the mind and temperament of the people.
\par A worse result was a certain fall from the high ideal of the Dharma. In
the struggle of kingdom with kingdom for supremacy a habit of Machiavellian
statecraft replaced the nobler ethical ideals of the past, aggressive ambition
was left without any sufficient spiritual or moral check and there was a
coarsening of the national mind in the ethics of politics and government
already evidenced in the draconic penal legislation of the Maurya times and in
Asoka's sanguinary conquest of Orissa. The deterioration, held in abeyance
by a religious spirit and high intelligence, did not come to a head till more than
a thousand years afterwards and we only see it in its full force in the worst
period of the decline when unrestrained mutual aggression, the unbridled
egoism of princes and leaders, a total lack of political principle and capacity
for effective union, the want of a common patriotism and the traditional
indifference of the common people to a change of rulers gave the whole of
the vast peninsula into the grasp of a handful of merchants from across the
seas. But however tardy the worst results in their coming and however
redeemed and held in check at first by the political greatness of the empire
and a splendid intellectual and artistic culture and by frequent spiritual
revivals, India had already lost by the time of the later Guptas the chance of a
natural and perfect flowering of her true mind and inmost spirit in the political
life of her peoples.
Page 438

\par Meanwhile the empire served well enough, although not perfectly, the
end for which it was created, the saving of Indian soil and Indian civilisation
from that immense flood of barbarian unrest which threatened all the ancient
stabilised cultures and finally proved too strong for the highly developed
Graeco-Roman civilisation and the vast and powerful Roman empire. That
unrest throwing great masses of Teutons, Slavs, Huns and Scythians to west
and east and south battered at the gates of India for many centuries, effected
certain inroads, but, when it sank, left the great edifice of Indian civilisation
standing and still firm, great and secure. The irruptions took place whenever
the empire grew weak and this seems to have happened whenever the
country was left for some time secure. The empire was weakened by the
suspension of the need which created it, for then the regional spirit reawoke
in separatist movements disintegrating its unity or breaking down its large
extension over all the North. A fresh peril brought about the renewal of its
strength under a new dynasty, but the phenomenon continued to repeat itself
until, the peril ceasing for a considerable time, the empire called into
existence to meet it passed away not to revive. It left behind it a certain
number of great kingdoms in the east, south and centre and a more confused
mass of peoples in the northwest, the weak point at which the Mussulmans
broke in and in a brief period rebuilt in the north, but in another, a Central
Asiatic type, the ancient empire.
\par These earlier foreign invasions and their effects have to be seen in their
true proportions, which are often disturbed by the exaggerated theories of
oriental scholars. The invasion of Alexander was an eastward impulsion of
Hellenism that had a work to do in western and central Asia, but no future in
India. Immediately ejected by Chandragupta, it left no traces. The entrance
of the Graeco-Bactrians which took place during the weakness of the later
Mauryas and was annulled by the reviving strength of the empire, was that of
a Hellenised people already profoundly influenced by Indian culture. The later
Parthian, Hun and Scythian invasions were of a more serious character and
for a time seemed dangerous to the integrity of India. In the
Page 439

end however they affected powerfully only the Punjab, although they threw
their waves farther south along the western coast and dynasties of a foreign
extraction may have been established for a time far down towards the south.
To what degree the racial character of these parts was affected, is far from
certain. Oriental scholars and ethnologists have imagined that the Punjab was
Scythianised, that the Rajputs are of the same stock and that even farther
south the race was changed by the intrusion. These speculations are founded
upon scanty or no evidence and are contradicted by other theories, and it is
highly doubtful whether the barbarian invaders could have come in such
numbers as to produce so considerable a consequence. It is farther rendered
improbable by the fact that in one or two or three generations the invaders
were entirely Indianised, assumed completely the Indian religion, manners,
customs, culture and melted into the mass of the Indian peoples. No such
phenomenon took place as in the countries of the Roman empire, of barbarian
tribes imposing on a superior civilisation their laws, political system, barbaric
customs, alien rule. This is the common significant fact of these irruptions and
it must have been due to one or all of three factors. The invaders may have
been armies rather than peoples: the occupation was not a continuous
external rule which had time to stiffen in its foreign character, for each was
followed by a revival of the strength of the Indian empire and its return upon
the conquered provinces: and finally the powerfully vital and absorbing
character of Indian culture was too strong to allow of any mental resistance
to assimilation in the intruders. At any rate if these irruptions were of a very
considerable character, Indian civilisation must be considered to have proved
itself much more sound, more vital and more solid than the younger
Graeco-Roman which went down before the Teuton and the Arab or
survived only underneath and in a debased form heavily barbarised, broken
and unrecognisable. And the Indian empire too must be pronounced to have
proved after all more efficacious than was the Roman with all its vaunt of
solidity and greatness, for it succeeded, even if pierced in the west, in
preserving the security of the great mass of the peninsula.
Page 440

\par It is a later downfall, the Mussulman conquest failing in the hands of the
Arabs but successfully reattempted after a long interval, and all that followed
it which serves to justify the doubt thrown on the capacity of the Indian
peoples. But first let us put aside certain misconceptions which cloud the real
issue. This conquest took place at a time when the vitality of ancient Indian
life and culture after two thousand years of activity and creation was already
exhausted for a time or very near exhaustion and needed a breathing space
to rejuvenate itself by transference from the Sanskrit to the popular tongues
and the newly forming regional peoples. The conquest was effected rapidly
enough in the north, although not entirely complete there for several
centuries, but the south long preserved its freedom as of old against the
earlier indigenous empire and there was not so long a distance of time
between the extinction of the kingdom of Vijayanagara and the rise of the
Mahrattas. The Rajputs maintained their independence until the time of
Akbar and his successors and it was in the end partly with the aid of Rajput
princes acting as their generals and ministers that the Moguls completed their
sway over the east and the south. And this was again possible because—a
fact too often forgotten—the Mussulman domination ceased very rapidly to
be a foreign rule. The vast mass of the Mussulmans in the country were and
are Indians by race, only a very small admixture of Pathan, Turkish and
Mogul blood took place, and even the foreign kings and nobles became
almost immediately wholly Indian in mind, life and interest. If the race had
really like certain European countries remained for many centuries passive,
acquiescent and impotent under an alien sway, that would indeed have been a
proof of a great inherent weakness; but the British is the first really
continuous foreign rule that has dominated India. The ancient civilisation
underwent indeed an eclipse and decline under the weight of a Central
Asiatic religion and culture with which it failed to coalesce, but it survived its
pressure, put its impact on it in many directions and remained to our own day
alive even in decadence and capable of recovery, thus giving a proof of
strength and soundness rare in the history of human cultures.
Page 441

And in the political field it never ceased to throw up great rulers, statesmen,
soldiers, administrators. Its political genius was not in the decadence
sufficient, not coherent enough or swift in vision and action, to withstand the
Pathan, Mogul and European, but it was strong to survive and await every
opportunity of revival, made a bid for empire under Rana Sanga, created the
great kingdom of Vijayanagara, held its own for centuries against Islam in the
hills of Rajputana, and in its worst days still built and maintained against the
whole power of the ablest of the Moguls the kingdom of Shivaji, formed the
Mahratta confederacy and the Sikh Khalsa, undermined the great Mogul
structure and again made a last attempt at empire. On the brink of the final
and almost fatal collapse in the midst of unspeakable darkness, disunion and
confusion it could still produce Ranjit Singh and Nana Fadnavis and Madhoji
Scindia and oppose the inevitable march of England's destiny. These facts do
not diminish the weight of the charge that can be made of an incapacity to
see and solve the central problem and answer the one persistent question of
Fate, but considered as the phenomena of a decadence they make a
sufficiently remarkable record not easily paralleled under similar
circumstances and certainly put a different complexion on the total question
than the crude statement that India has been always subject and politically
incapable.
\par The real problem introduced by the Mussulman conquest was not that of
subjection to a foreign rule and the ability to recover freedom, but the struggle
between two civilisations, one ancient and indigenous, the other mediaeval
and brought in from outside. That which rendered the problem insoluble was
the attachment of each to a powerful religion, the one militant and aggressive,
the other spiritually tolerant indeed and flexible, but obstinately faithful in its
discipline to its own principle and standing on the defence behind a barrier of
social forms. There were two conceivable solutions, the rise of a greater
spiritual principle and formation which could reconcile the two or a political
patriotism surmounting the religious struggle and uniting the two communities.
The first was impossible in that age. Akbar attempted it on the Mussulman
side, but his religion
Page 442

was an intellectual and political rather than a spiritual creation and had never
any chance of assent from the strongly religious mind of the two
communities. Nanak attempted it from the Hindu side, but his religion,
universal in principle, became a sect in practice. Akbar attempted also to
create a common political patriotism, but this endeavour too was foredoomed
to failure. An autocratic empire built on the Central Asian principle could not
create the desired spirit by calling in the administrative ability of the two
communities in the person of great men and princes and nobles to a common
service in the creation of a united imperial India: the living assent of the
people was needed and that remained passive for want of awakening political
ideals and institutions. The Mogul empire was a great and magnificent
construction and an immense amount of political genius and talent was
employed in its creation and maintenance. It was as splendid, powerful and
beneficent and, it may be added, in spite of Aurangzeb's fanatical zeal,
infinitely more liberal and tolerant in religion than any mediaeval or
contemporary European kingdom or empire and India under its rule stood
high in military and political strength, economic opulence and the brilliance of
its art and culture. But it failed like the empires before it, more disastrously
even, and in the same way, crumbling not by external attack but by internal
disintegration. A military and administrative centralised empire could not
effect India's living political unity. And although a new life seemed about to
rise in the regional peoples, the chance was cut short by the intrusion of the
European nations and their seizure of the opportunity created by the failure of
the Peshwas and the desperate confusion of the succeeding anarchy and
decadence.
\par Two remarkable creations embodied in the period of disintegration the
last effort of the Indian political mind to form the foundations of a new life
under the old conditions, but neither proved to be of a kind that could solve
the problem. The Mahratta revival inspired by Ramdas's conception of the
Maharashtra Dharma and cast into shape by Shivaji was an attempt to
restore what could still be understood or remembered of the ancient form and
spirit, but it failed, as all attempts to
Page 443

revive the past must fail, in spite of the spiritual impetus and the democratic
forces that assisted its inception. The Peshwas for all their genius lacked the
vision of the founder and could only establish a military and political
confederacy. And their endeavour to found an empire could not succeed
because it was inspired by a regional patriotism that failed to enlarge itself
beyond its own limits and awaken to the living ideal of a united India. The
Sikh Khalsa on the other hand was an astonishingly original and novel
creation and its face was turned not to the past but the future. Apart and
singular in its theocratic head and democratic soul and structure, its profound
spiritual beginning, its first attempt to combine the deepest elements of Islam
and Vedanta, it was a premature drive towards an entrance into the third or
spiritual stage of human society, but it could not create between the spirit and
the external life the transmitting medium of a rich creative thought and
culture. And thus hampered and deficient it began and ended within narrow
local limits, achieved intensity but no power of expansion. The conditions
were not then in existence that could have made possible a successful
endeavour.
\par Afterwards came the night and a temporary end of all political initiative
and creation. The lifeless attempt of the last generation to imitate and
reproduce with a servile fidelity the ideals and forms of the West has been no
true indication of the political mind and genius of the Indian people. But again
amid all the mist of confusion there is still the possibility of a new twilight, not
of an evening but a morning Yuga-sandhya. India of the ages is not dead nor
has she spoken her last creative word; she lives and has still something to do
for herself and the human peoples. And that which must seek now to awake
is not an anglicised oriental people, docile pupil of the West and doomed to
repeat the cycle of the Occident's success and failure, but still the ancient
immemorable Shakti recovering her deepest self, lifting her head higher
towards the supreme source of light and strength and turning to discover the
complete meaning and a vaster form of her Dharma.
Page 444

\preface
\par
\ht Note on the Texts
\par
Page 445

\fsqstart
\section
\par
\ht Note on the Texts
\par\nodrop The thirty-two essays that make up this volume were first
published in the monthly journal {\it Arya} between August 1918 and January
1921. Each essay was written immediately before its publication.
\par
\PF{\ftextbi The Renaissance in India}. Four essays appeared in the {\it
Arya} between August and November 1918 under the title {\it The
Renaissance in India}. In September 1920 they were published under the
same title by the Prabartak Publishing House, Chandernagore, after being
revised lightly by Sri Aurobindo. The publisher's note to this edition stated:
“The subject matter of the book was written in a way of appreciation of Mr.
James H. Cousins' book of the same name.” Cousins' {\it Renaissance in
India}, a series of articles on contemporary Indian art and other subjects, was
published by Ganesh & Co., Madras, with a preface dated June 1918. New
editions of Sri Aurobindo's {\it Renaissance in India} were published in 1927,
1937, 1946, 1951 and 1966. The 1966 edition has been frequently reprinted.
In 1971 and 1972 {\it The Renaissance in India} was published along with {\it
The Foundations of Indian Culture} (see below) as volume 14 of the Sri
Aurobindo Birth Centenary Library (de luxe and popular editions).
\par
\PF{\ftextbi Indian Culture and External Influence}. This essay, published in
March 1919, was written in answer to a comment in the Bengali journal {\it
Narayan} on Sri Aurobindo's series, {\it The Renaissance in India}. In 1953
the essay was included in {\it The Foundations of Indian Culture} as an
appendix.
\par
\PF{\ftextbi “Is India Civilised?”}. Three essays appeared in the {\it Arya}
under this title between December 1918 and February 1919. They were
written in response to a book by Sir John Woodroffe entitled {\it Is India
Civilized? Essays on Indian Culture} (Madras: Ganesh & Co., foreword
dated 4 October 1918). Woodroffe's book was itself a response to a book by
William Archer, {\it India and the Future} (London: Hutchinson & Co.,
1917).
\par
\PF{\ftextbi A Defence of Indian Culture}. In the issue of the {\it Arya} in
which he concluded {\it “Is India Civilised?”}, Sri Aurobindo began another
series dealing in more detail with William Archer's criticisms of Indian
culture, taken to represent a typical Western attitude at that time. Six essays
were published under the title “A Rationalistic Critic on Indian Culture”
between February and July 1919. In the August 1919 issue of the {\it Arya}
the title “A Defence of Indian Culture” appeared for the first time with this
note: “As these articles have extended beyond their original intention, a more
suitable title is substituted for the original heading.” The next eighteen articles
appeared under the new title. The twenty-four instalments of the series were
numbered I-XXIV (actually XXIII due to an error). The series was
discontinued with the termination of the {\it Arya} in January 1921.
\par
\PF{\ftextb Revision of} {\ftextbi “Is India Civilised?”} {\ftextb and}
{\ftextbi A Defence of Indian Culture}. Sometime in the 1920s or 1930s Sri
Aurobindo revised the three instalments of {\it “Is India Civilised?”} and the
first eight and a half instalments of {\it A Defence of Indian Culture}
(including the six entitled “A Rationalistic Critic on Indian Culture”). When
the eight essays on art and polity referred to in the next paragraph were
republished in 1947, Sri Aurobindo revised them slightly. He also made a few
changes to the essays on literature. The rest of {\it A Defence of Indian
Culture} was not revised.
\par
\PF{\ftextb Separate booklets}. In February 1947 the four instalments on
Indian art from {\it A Defence of Indian Culture} were published by Sri
Aurobindo Circle, Bombay, under the title {\it The Significance of Indian
Art}. New editions of this booklet were published in 1953 and 1964. In 1947,
sometime after February, the four instalments on Indian polity were published
by the Arya Publishing House, Calcutta, under the title {\it The Spirit and
Form of Indian Polity}. A new edition of this booklet was brought out in
1966. The publisher's note to {\it The Significance of Indian Art}, seen and
approved by Sri Aurobindo, is reproduced below in full:
\par
\SF These chapters have been abstracted from Sri Aurobindo's work left
unfinished in the Arya,—{\it A Defence of Indian \NH Culture }(1918-1921).
This was undertaken as a reply to a considerable work by Mr. William
Archer criticising and attacking Indian civilisation and culture in all its
domains: at that time this critic's views were typical of a very general attitude
of the European mind towards the Indian civilisation and its special character,
forms and creations and to combat the self-depreciation awakened in the
Indian mind by this hostile impact and to explain to it the meaning of its own
civilisation and past achievements was the main object of Sri Aurobindo.
Since then, there has been a radical change and Mr. Archer's strictures and
the answer to them might have been omitted and only the positive part of the
work retained in this publication but there is a historical interest in the
comparison or contrast drawn and otherwise also it may still have its value.
The four chapters have therefore been reprinted in their entirety.
\par
\PF In 1949, a year before Sri Aurobindo's passing, he was asked about the
possibility of bringing out the whole of {\it A Defence of Indian Culture}. At
this time, in a statement reproduced in the Publisher's Note to the present
volume, he indicated that he did not feel that the book as it then stood was
ready for publication.
\par
\PF{\ftextbi The Foundations of Indian Culture}. In 1953 the three essays of
{\it “Is India Civilised?”}, the twenty-four chapters making up {\it A Defence
of Indian Culture} and, as an appendix, {\it Indian Culture and External
Influence} (but not {\it The Renaissance in India}) were published by The Sri
Aurobindo Library, New York, as {\it The Foundations of Indian Culture}.
This title was provided by the editors of the volume. The editors divided the
last eighteen chapters of {\it A Defence} into four sections for which they
provided headings: “Religion and Spirituality”, “Indian Art”, “Indian
Literature”, “Indian Polity”. The same material identically arranged was
published under the same title by the Sri Aurobindo Ashram, Pondicherry, in
1959. A new edition of this book was brought out in 1968. {\it The
Foundations of Indian Culture} and {\it The Renaissance in India} were
published together in 1971 and 1972 as the de luxe and popular editions of
volume 14 of the Sri Aurobindo Birth Centenary Library. The SABCL edition
of {\it The Foundations}, without {\it The \NH Renaissance, }was reprinted
in reduced facsimile in 1975 and five more times between 1980 and 1995.
\par
\PF{\ftextb The 1998 edition}. In 1998 the same writings that had appeared
earlier in volume 14 of the Sri Aurobindo Birth Centenary Library were
brought out, in a different order, as volume 20 of The Complete Works of Sri
Aurobindo. The volume was named {\it The Renaissance in India with A
Defence of Indian Culture}, using the titles Sri Aurobindo himself gave to the
two principal sets of essays. {\it The Renaissance in India} formed the
starting-point and was the only series brought out as a book during Sri
Aurobindo's lifetime. Its title was given priority over that of the longer but
unfinished series, {\it A Defence of Indian Culture}. {\it “Is India
Civilised?”} and {\it Indian Culture and External Influence} were put in their
appropriate places. With the exception of the last-named piece, the essays
appeared in the order in which they were published in the {\it Arya}. The
editors kept the original sequential numbering of the twenty-four essays of
{\it A Defence of Indian Culture}. In addition they retained the {\it Arya}
heading “A Rationalistic Critic on Indian Culture” for the first six chapters.
They also used the headings given in 1953 to the four editorial divisions of the
remainder of the work, with one change, the replacement of “Religion and
Spirituality” by “Indian Spirituality and Life”. The entire text was carefully
checked against the {\it Arya} and, where appropriate, against the revised
versions.
\par
\PF The text of the present, electronic, edition (1999) is identical to the text of
the CWSA edition. For the convenience of those who use the SABCL
edition, SABCL page numbers are provided as well as the CWSA page
numbers. \fsqend



