\set
\title The Synthesis Of Yoga
\author Sri Aurobindo

\preface
\par
\ht Publisher's Note
\par\nodrop{\it The Synthesis of Yoga} first appeared serially in the monthly review {\it Arya} between August
1914 and January 1921. Each instalment was written immediately before its publication. The work was left
incomplete when the {\it Arya} was discontinued. Sri Aurobindo never attempted to complete the {\it Synthesis};
he did, however, lightly revise the Introduction, thoroughly revise all of Part I, “The Yoga of Divine Works”, and
significantly revise several chapters of Part II, “The Yoga of Integral Knowledge”. More than thirty years
elapsed between the first appearance of the {\it Synthesis} in the {\it Arya} and the final stages of its incomplete
revision. As a result, there are some differences of terminology between the revised and unrevised portions of
the book.
\par In 1948 the chapters making up “The Yoga of Divine Works” were published as a book by the Sri
Aurobindo Library, Madras. No other part of {\it The Synthesis of Yoga} appeared in book-form during Sri
Aurobindo's lifetime. In 1955 an edition comprising the Introduction and four Parts was brought out by the Sri
Aurobindo International University Centre.
\par In 1970 {\it The Synthesis of Yoga} was published as volumes 20 and 21 of the Sri Aurobindo Birth
Centenary Library. This edition was reprinted many times.
\par In 1999 {\it The Synthesis of Yoga} was brought out as volumes 23 and 24 of The Complete Works of Sri
Aurobindo. The text of this edition was carefully checked against Sri Aurobindo's manuscripts and all editions
published before 1950. It included for the first time the author's revisions to the Introduction and Chapters
XV-XVII of Part II, and an incomplete continuation of Part IV entitled “The Supramental Time Consciousness”.
\par The text of the present, electronic, edition (1999) is identical to the text of the CWSA edition. For the
convenience of those who use the SABCL edition, SABCL page numbers are provided as well as the CWSA
page numbers.
\par
Page --

\ht The Synthesis of Yoga\nl “All life is Yoga.”
\book
\par
Page 1

\ht Introduction

\part
\par
\ht The Conditions of the Synthesis

\chapter
\par
Page 3

\hn Chapter I
\par
\ht Life and Yoga
\par\drop There are two necessities of Nature's workings which seem always to intervene in the greater forms
of human activity, whether these belong to our ordinary fields of movement or seek those exceptional spheres
and fulfilments which appear to us high and divine. Every such form tends towards a harmonised complexity and
totality which again breaks apart into various channels of special effort and tendency, only to unite once more in
a larger and more puissant synthesis. Secondly, development into forms is an imperative rule of effective
manifestation; yet all truth and practice too strictly formulated becomes old and loses much, if not all, of its virtue;
it must be constantly renovated by fresh streams of the spirit revivifying the dead or dying vehicle and changing
it, if it is to acquire a new life. To be perpetually reborn is the condition of a material immortality. We are in an
age, full of the throes of travail, when all forms of thought and activity that have in themselves any strong power
of utility or any secret virtue of persistence are being subjected to a supreme test and given their opportunity of
rebirth. The world today presents the aspect of a huge cauldron of Medea in which all things are being cast,
shredded into pieces, experimented on, combined and recombined either to perish and provide the scattered
material of new forms or to emerge rejuvenated and changed for a fresh term of existence. Indian Yoga, in its
essence a special action or formulation of certain great powers of Nature, itself specialised, divided and variously
formulated, is potentially one of these dynamic elements of the future life of humanity. The child of immemorial
ages, preserved by its vitality and truth into our modern times, it is now emerging from the secret schools and
ascetic retreats in which it had taken refuge and is seeking its place in the future sum of living human powers
and utilities. But it has first to rediscover itself, bring to the surface
Page 5

the profoundest reason of its being in that general truth and that unceasing aim of Nature which it represents, and
find by virtue of this new self-knowledge and self-appreciation its own recovered and larger synthesis.
Reorganising itself, it will enter more easily and powerfully into the reorganised life of the race which its
processes claim to lead within into the most secret penetralia and upward to the highest altitudes of existence and
personality.
\par In the right view both of life and of Yoga all life is either consciously or subconsciously a Yoga. For we
mean by this term a methodised effort towards self-perfection by the expression of the secret potentialities latent
in the being and—highest condition of victory in that effort—a union of the human individual with the universal
and transcendent Existence we see partially expressed in man and in the Cosmos. But all life, when we look
behind its appearances, is a vast Yoga of Nature who attempts in the conscious and the subconscious to realise
her perfection in an ever-increasing expression of her yet unrealised potentialities and to unite herself with her
own divine reality. In man, her thinker, she for the first time upon this Earth devises self-conscious means and
willed arrangements of activity by which this great purpose may be more swiftly and puissantly attained. Yoga,
as Swami Vivekananda has said, may be regarded as a means of compressing one's evolution into a single life or
a few years or even a few months of bodily existence. A given system of Yoga, then, can be no more than a
selection or a compression, into narrower but more energetic forms of intensity, of the general methods which
are already being used loosely, largely, in a leisurely movement, with a profuser apparent waste of material and
energy but with a more complete combination by the great Mother in her vast upward labour. It is this view of
Yoga that can alone form the basis for a sound and rational synthesis of Yogic methods. For then Yoga ceases
to appear something mystic and abnormal which has no relation to the ordinary processes of the World-Energy
or the purpose she keeps in view in her two great movements of subjective and objective self-fulfilment; it
reveals itself rather as an intense and exceptional use of powers that she has already manifested or is
progressively
Page 6

organising in her less exalted but more general operations.
\par Yogic methods have something of the same relation to the customary psychological workings of man as has
the scientific handling of the force of electricity or of steam to their normal operations in Nature. And they, too,
like the operations of Science, are formed upon a knowledge developed and confirmed by regular experiment,
practical analysis and constant result. All Rajayoga, for instance, depends on this perception and experience that
our inner elements, combinations, functions, forces, can be separated or dissolved, can be new-combined and set
to novel and formerly impossible workings or can be transformed and resolved into a new general synthesis by
fixed internal processes. Hathayoga similarly depends on this perception and experience that the vital forces and
functions to which our life is normally subjected and whose ordinary operations seem set and indispensable, can
be mastered and the operations changed or suspended with results that would otherwise be impossible and that
seem miraculous to those who have not seized the rationale of their process. And if in some other of its forms
this character of Yoga is less apparent, because they are more intuitive and less mechanical, nearer, like the
Yoga of Devotion, to a supernal ecstasy or, like the Yoga of Knowledge, to a supernal infinity of consciousness
and being, yet they too start from the use of some principal faculty in us by ways and for ends not contemplated
in its everyday spontaneous workings. All methods grouped under the common name of Yoga are special
psychological processes founded on a fixed truth of Nature and developing, out of normal functions, powers and
results which were always latent but which her ordinary movements do not easily or do not often manifest.
\par But as in physical knowledge the multiplication of scientific processes has its disadvantages, as that tends,
for instance, to develop a victorious artificiality which overwhelms our natural human life under a load of
machinery and to purchase certain forms of freedom and mastery at the price of an increased servitude, so the
preoccupation with Yogic processes and their exceptional results may have its disadvantages and losses. The
Page 7

Yogin tends to draw away from the common existence and lose his hold upon it; he tends to purchase wealth of
spirit by an impoverishment of his human activities, the inner freedom by an outer death. If he gains God, he
loses life, or if he turns his efforts outward to conquer life, he is in danger of losing God. Therefore we see in
India that a sharp incompatibility has been created between life in the world and spiritual growth and perfection,
and although the tradition and ideal of a victorious harmony between the inner attraction and the outer demand
remains, it is little or else very imperfectly exemplified. In fact, when a man turns his vision and energy inward
and enters on the path of Yoga, he is popularly supposed to be lost inevitably to the great stream of our collective
existence and the secular effort of humanity. So strongly has the idea prevailed, so much has it been emphasised
by prevalent philosophies and religions that to escape from life is now commonly considered as not only the
necessary condition, but the general object of Yoga. No synthesis of Yoga can be satisfying which does not, in
its aim, reunite God and Nature in a liberated and perfected human life or, in its method, not only permit but
favour the harmony of our inner and outer activities and experiences in the divine consummation of both. For
man is precisely that term and symbol of a higher Existence descended into the material world in which it is
possible for the lower to transfigure itself and put on the nature of the higher and the higher to reveal itself in the
forms of the lower. To avoid the life which is given him for the realisation of that possibility, can never be either
the indispensable condition or the whole and ultimate object of his supreme endeavour or of his most powerful
means of self-fulfilment. It can only be a temporary necessity under certain conditions or a specialised extreme
effort imposed on the individual so as to prepare a greater general possibility for the race. The true and full object
and utility of Yoga can only be accomplished when the conscious Yoga in man becomes, like the subconscious
Yoga in Nature, outwardly conterminous with life itself and we can once more, looking out both on the path and
the achievement, say in a more perfect and luminous sense: “All life is Yoga.”
Page 8

\par
\hn Chapter II
\par
\ht The Three Steps of Nature
\par\drop We recognise then, in the past developments of Yoga, a specialising and separative tendency which,
like all things in Nature, had its justifying and even imperative utility and we seek a synthesis of the specialised
aims and methods which have, in consequence, come into being. But in order that we may be wisely guided in
our effort, we must know, first, the general principle and purpose underlying this separative impulse and, next, the
particular utilities upon which the method of each school of Yoga is founded. For the general principle we must
interrogate the universal workings of Nature herself, recognising in her no merely specious and illusive activity of
a distorting Maya, but the cosmic energy and working of God Himself in His universal being formulating and
inspired by a vast, an infinite and yet a minutely selective Wisdom, \s{praj\~n\=a pras\,rt\=a pur\=a\,n\=i} of the Upanishad,
Wisdom that went forth from the Eternal since the beginning. For the particular utilities we must cast a
penetrative eye on the different methods of Yoga and distinguish among the mass of their details the governing
idea which they serve and the radical force which gives birth and energy to their processes of effectuation.
Afterwards we may more easily find the one common principle and the one common power from which all
derive their being and tendency, towards which all subconsciously move and in which, therefore, it is possible for
all consciously to unite.
\par The progressive self-manifestation of Nature in man, termed in modern language his evolution, must
necessarily depend upon three successive elements. There is that which is already evolved; there is that which,
still imperfect, still partly fluid, is persistently in the stage of conscious evolution; and there is that which is to be
evolved and may perhaps be already
Page 9

displayed, if not constantly, then occasionally or with some regularity of recurrence, in primary formations or in
others more developed and, it may well be, even in some, however rare, that are near to the highest possible
realisation of our present humanity. For the march of Nature is not drilled to a regular and mechanical forward
stepping. She reaches constantly beyond herself even at the cost of subsequent deplorable retreats. She has
rushes; she has splendid and mighty outbursts; she has immense realisations. She storms sometimes passionately
forward hoping to take the kingdom of heaven by violence. And these self-exceedings are the revelation of that
in her which is most divine or else most diabolical, but in either case the most puissant to bring her rapidly
forward towards her goal.
\par That which Nature has evolved for us and has firmly founded is the bodily life. She has effected a certain
combination and harmony of the two inferior but most fundamentally necessary elements of our action and
progress upon earth,—Matter, which, however the too ethereally spiritual may despise it, is our foundation and
the first condition of all our energies and realisations, and the Life-Energy which is our means of existence in a
material body and the basis there even of our mental and spiritual activities. She has successfully achieved a
certain stability of her constant material movement which is at once sufficiently steady and durable and
sufficiently pliable and mutable to provide a fit dwelling-place and instrument for the progressively manifesting
god in humanity. This is what is meant by the fable in the Aitareya Upanishad which tells us that the gods
rejected the animal forms successively offered to them by the Divine Self and only when man was produced,
cried out, “This indeed is perfectly made,” and consented to enter in. She has effected also a working
compromise between the inertia of matter and the active Life that lives in and feeds on it, by which not only is
vital existence sustained, but the fullest developments of mentality are rendered possible. This equilibrium
constitutes the basic status of Nature in man and is termed in the language of Yoga his gross body composed
Page 10

of the material or food sheath and the nervous system or vital vehicle.
\note{\s{annako\,sa} and \s{pr\=a\,nako\,sa}.}
\par If, then, this inferior equilibrium is the basis and first means of the higher movements which the universal
Power contemplates and if it constitutes the vehicle in which the Divine here seeks to reveal Itself, if the Indian
saying is true that the body is the instrument provided for the fulfilment of the right law of our nature, then any
final recoil from the physical life must be a turning away from the completeness of the divine Wisdom and a
renunciation of its aim in earthly manifestation. Such a refusal may be, owing to some secret law of their
development, the right attitude for certain individuals, but never the aim intended for mankind. It can be,
therefore, no integral Yoga which ignores the body or makes its annulment or its rejection indispensable to a
perfect spirituality. Rather, the perfecting of the body also should be the last triumph of the Spirit and to make the
bodily life also divine must be God's final seal upon His work in the universe. The obstacle which the physical
presents to the spiritual is no argument for the rejection of the physical; for in the unseen providence of things our
greatest difficulties are our best opportunities. A supreme difficulty is Nature's indication to us of a supreme
conquest to be won and an ultimate problem to be solved; it is not a warning of an inextricable snare to be
shunned or of an enemy too strong for us from whom we must flee.
\par Equally, the vital and nervous energies in us are there for a great utility; they too demand the divine
realisation of their possibilities in our ultimate fulfilment. The great part assigned to this element in the universal
scheme is powerfully emphasised by the catholic wisdom of the Upanishads. “As the spokes of a wheel in its
nave, so in the Life-Energy is all established, the triple knowledge and the Sacrifice and the power of the strong
and the purity of the wise. Under the control of the Life-Energy is all this that is established in the triple
heaven.”
\note{Prasna Upanishad II. 6 and 13.} It is therefore no integral Yoga that kills these vital energies, forces them
into a nerveless quiescence or roots them out as the source
Page 11

of \NH noxious activities. Their purification, not their destruction,—their transformation, control and utilisation is
the aim in view with which they have been created and developed in us.
\par If the bodily life is what Nature has firmly evolved for us as her base and first instrument, it is our mental life
that she is evolving as her immediate next aim and superior instrument. This in her ordinary exaltations is the
lofty preoccupying thought in her; this, except in her periods of exhaustion and recoil into a reposeful and
recuperating obscurity, is her constant pursuit wherever she can get free from the trammels of her first vital and
physical realisations. For here in man we have a distinction which is of the utmost importance. He has in him not
a single mentality, but a double and a triple, the mind material and nervous, the pure intellectual mind which
liberates itself from the illusions of the body and the senses, and a divine mind above intellect which in its turn
liberates itself from the imperfect modes of the logically discriminative and imaginative reason. Mind in man is
first emmeshed in the life of the body, where in the plant it is entirely involved and in animals always imprisoned.
It accepts this life as not only the first but the whole condition of its activities and serves its needs as if they were
the entire aim of existence. But the bodily life in man is a base, not the aim, his first condition and not his last
determinant. In the just idea of the ancients man is essentially the thinker, the Manu, the mental being who leads
the life and the body,
\note{\s{manomaya\,h pr\=a\,na\'sar\=iranet\=a}. Mundaka Upanishad II. 2. 8.} not the animal who is led by them. The
true human existence, therefore, only begins when the intellectual mentality emerges out of the material and we
begin more and more to live in the mind independent of the nervous and physical obsession and in the measure of
that liberty are able to accept rightly and rightly to use the life of the body. For freedom and not a skilful
subjection is the true means of mastery. A free, not a compulsory acceptance of the conditions, the enlarged and
sublimated conditions of our physical being, is the high human ideal. But beyond this intellectual mentality is the
divine.
\par The mental life thus evolving in man is not, indeed, a
Page 12

\NH common possession. In actual appearance it would seem as if it were only developed to the fullest in
individuals and as if there were great numbers and even the majority in whom it is either a small and ill-organised
part of their normal nature or not evolved at all or latent and not easily made active. Certainly, the mental life is
not a finished evolution of Nature; it is not yet firmly founded in the human animal. The sign is that the fine and
full equilibrium of vitality and matter, the sane, robust, long-lived human body is ordinarily found only in races or
classes of men who reject the effort of thought, its disturbances, its tensions, or think only with the material mind.
Civilised man has yet to establish an equilibrium between the fully active mind and the body; he does not normally
possess it. Indeed, the increasing effort towards a more intense mental life seems to create, frequently, an
increasing disequilibrium of the human elements, so that it is possible for eminent scientists to describe genius as
a form of insanity, a result of degeneration, a pathological morbidity of Nature. The phenomena which are used
to justify this exaggeration, when taken not separately, but in connection with all other relevant data, point to a
different truth. Genius is one attempt of the universal Energy to so quicken and intensify our intellectual powers
that they shall be prepared for those more puissant, direct and rapid faculties which constitute the play of the
supra-intellectual or divine mind. It is not, then, a freak, an inexplicable phenomenon, but a perfectly natural next
step in the right line of her evolution. She has harmonised the bodily life with the material mind, she is
harmonising it with the play of the intellectual mentality; for that, although it tends to a depression of the full
animal and vital vigour, need not produce active disturbances. And she is shooting yet beyond in the attempt to
reach a still higher level. Nor are the disturbances created by her process as great as is often represented. Some
of them are the crude beginnings of new manifestations; others are an easily corrected movement of
disintegration, often fruitful of fresh activities and always a small price to pay for the far-reaching results that she
has in view.
\par We may perhaps, if we consider all the circumstances, come
Page 13

to this conclusion that mental life, far from being a recent appearance in man, is the swift repetition in him of a
previous achievement from which the Energy in the race had undergone one of her deplorable recoils. The
savage is perhaps not so much the first forefather of civilised man as the degenerate descendant of a previous
civilisation. For if the actuality of intellectual achievement is unevenly distributed, the capacity is spread \NH
everywhere. It has been seen that in individual cases even the racial type considered by us the lowest, the negro
fresh from the perennial barbarism of Central Africa, is capable, without admixture of blood, without waiting for
future generations, of the intellectual culture, if not yet of the intellectual accomplishment of the dominant
European. Even in the mass men seem to need, in favourable circumstances, only a few generations to cover
ground that ought apparently to be measured in the terms of millenniums. Either, then, man by his privilege as a
mental being is exempt from the full burden of the tardy laws of evolution or else he already represents and with
helpful conditions and in the right stimulating atmosphere can always display a high level of material capacity for
the activities of the intellectual life. It is not mental incapacity, but the long rejection or seclusion from opportunity
and withdrawal of the awakening impulse that creates the savage. Barbarism is an intermediate sleep, not an
original darkness.
\par Moreover the whole trend of modern thought and modern endeavour reveals itself to the observant eye as a
large conscious effort of Nature in man to effect a general level of intellectual equipment, capacity and farther
possibility by universalising the opportunities which modern civilisation affords for the mental life. Even the
preoccupation of the European intellect, the protagonist of this tendency, with material Nature and the
externalities of existence is a necessary part of the effort. It seeks to prepare a sufficient basis in man's physical
being and vital energies and in his material environment for his full mental possibilities. By the spread of
education, by the advance of the backward races, by the elevation of depressed classes, by the multiplication of
labour-saving appliances, by the movement
Page 14

towards ideal social and economic conditions, by the labour of Science towards an improved health, longevity and
sound physique in civilised humanity, the sense and drift of this vast movement translates itself in easily intelligible
signs. The right or at least the ultimate means may not always be employed, but their aim is the right preliminary
aim,—a sound individual and social body and the satisfaction of the legitimate needs and demands of the material
mind, sufficient ease, leisure, equal opportunity, so that the whole of mankind and no longer only the favoured
race, class or individual may be free to develop the emotional and intellectual being to its full capacity. At present
the material and economic aim may predominate, but always, behind, there works or there waits in reserve the
higher and major impulse.
\par And when the preliminary conditions are satisfied, when the great endeavour has found its base, what will
be the nature of that farther possibility which the activities of the intellectual life must serve? If Mind is indeed
Nature's highest term, then the entire development of the rational and imaginative intellect and the harmonious
satisfaction of the emotions and sensibilities must be to themselves sufficient. But if, on the contrary, man is more
than a reasoning and emotional animal, if beyond that which is being evolved, there is something that has to be
evolved, then it may well be that the fullness of the mental life, the suppleness, flexibility and wide capacity of the
intellect, the ordered richness of emotion and sensibility may be only a passage towards the development of a
higher life and of more powerful faculties which are yet to manifest and to take possession of the lower
instrument, just as mind itself has so taken possession of the body that the physical being no longer lives only for
its own satisfaction but provides the foundation and the materials for a superior activity.
\par The assertion of a higher than the mental life is the whole foundation of Indian philosophy and its acquisition
and organisation is the veritable object served by the methods of Yoga. Mind is not the last term of evolution, not
an ultimate aim, but, like body, an instrument. It is even so termed in the language of
Page 15

Yoga, the inner instrument.
\note{\s{anta\,hkara\,na}.} And Indian tradition asserts that this which is to be manifested is not a new term in
human experience, but has been developed before and has even governed humanity in certain periods of its
development. In any case, in order to be known it must at one time have been partly developed. And if since then
Nature has sunk back from her achievement, the reason must always be found in some unrealised harmony,
some insufficiency of the intellectual and material basis to which she has now returned, some over-specialisation
of the higher to the detriment of the lower existence.
\par But what then constitutes this higher or highest existence to which our evolution is tending? In order to
answer the question we have to deal with a class of supreme experiences, a class of unusual conceptions which
it is difficult to represent accurately in any other language than the ancient Sanskrit tongue in which alone they
have been to some extent systematised. The only approximate terms in the English language have other
associations and their use may lead to many and even serious inaccuracies. The terminology of Yoga recognises
besides the status of our physical and vital being, termed the gross body and doubly composed of the food sheath
and the vital vehicle, besides the status of our mental being, termed the subtle body and singly composed of the
mind sheath or mental vehicle,
\note{\s{mana\,h-ko\,sa}.} a third, supreme and divine status of supra-mental being, termed the causal body and
composed of a fourth and a fifth vehicle
\note{\s{vij\~n\=anako\,sa} and \s{\=anandako\,sa}.} which are described as those of knowledge and bliss. But this
knowledge is not a systematised result of mental questionings and reasonings, not a temporary arrangement of
conclusions and opinions in the terms of the highest probability, but rather a pure self-existent and self-luminous
Truth. And this bliss is not a supreme pleasure of the heart and sensations with the experience of pain and
sorrow as its background, but a delight also self-existent and independent of objects and particular experiences, a
self-delight which is the very nature, the very stuff, as it were, of a transcendent and infinite existence.
Page 16

\par Do such psychological conceptions correspond to anything real and possible? All Yoga asserts them as its
ultimate experience and supreme aim. They form the governing principles of our highest possible state of
consciousness, our widest possible range of existence. There is, we say, a harmony of supreme faculties,
corresponding roughly to the psychological faculties of revelation, inspiration and intuition, yet acting not in the
intuitive reason or the divine mind, but on a still higher plane, which see Truth directly face to face, or rather live
in the truth of things both universal and transcendent and are its formulation and luminous activity. And these
faculties are the light of a conscious existence superseding the egoistic and itself both cosmic and transcendent,
the nature of which is Bliss. These are obviously divine and, as man is at present apparently constituted,
superhuman states of consciousness and activity. A trinity of transcendent existence, self-awareness and
self-delight
\note{\s{saccid\=ananda}.} is, indeed, the metaphysical description of the supreme Atman, the self-formulation, to
our awakened knowledge, of the Unknowable whether conceived as a pure Impersonality or as a cosmic
Personality manifesting the universe. But in Yoga they are regarded also in their psychological aspects as states
of subjective existence to which our waking consciousness is now alien, but which dwell in us in a
superconscious plane and to which, therefore, we may always ascend.
\par For, as is indicated by the name, causal body (\s{k\=ara\,na}), as opposed to the two others which are
instruments (\s{kara\,na}), this crowning manifestation is also the source and effective power of all that in the
actual evolution has preceded it. Our mental activities are, indeed, a derivation, selection and, so long as they are
divided from the truth that is secretly their source, a deformation of the divine knowledge. Our sensations and
emotions have the same relation to the Bliss, our vital forces and actions to the aspect of Will or Force assumed
by the divine consciousness, our physical being to the pure essence of that Bliss and Consciousness. The
evolution which we observe and of which
Page 17

we are the terrestrial summit may be considered, in a sense, as an inverse manifestation, by which these
supreme Powers in their unity and their diversity use, develop and perfect the imperfect substance and activities
of Matter, of Life and of Mind so that they, the inferior modes, may express in mutable relativity an increasing
harmony of the divine and eternal states from which they are born. If this be the truth of the universe, then the
goal of evolution is also its cause, it is that which is immanent in its elements and out of them is liberated. But the
liberation is surely imperfect if it is only an escape and there is no return upon the containing substance and
activities to exalt and transform them. The immanence itself would have no credible reason for being if it did not
end in such a transfiguration. But if human mind can become capable of the glories of the divine Light, human
emotion and sensibility can be transformed into the mould and assume the measure and movement of the
supreme Bliss, human action not only represent but feel itself to be the motion of a divine and non-egoistic Force
and the physical substance of our being sufficiently partake of the purity of the supernal essence, sufficiently
unify plasticity and durable constancy to support and prolong these highest experiences and agencies, then all the
long labour of Nature will end in a crowning justification and her evolutions reveal their profound significance.
\par So dazzling is even a glimpse of this supreme existence and so absorbing its attraction that, once seen, we
feel readily justified in neglecting all else for its pursuit. Even, by an opposite exaggeration to that which sees all
things in Mind and the mental life as an exclusive ideal, Mind comes to be regarded as an unworthy deformation
and a supreme obstacle, the source of an illusory universe, a negation of the Truth and itself to be denied and all
its works and results annulled if we desire the final liberation. But this is a half-truth which errs by regarding only
the actual limitations of Mind and ignores its divine intention. The ultimate knowledge is that which perceives and
accepts God in the universe as well as beyond the universe; the integral Yoga is that which, having found the
Transcendent, can return upon the universe and possess it, retaining the power freely to descend
Page 18

as well as ascend the great stair of existence. For if the eternal Wisdom exists at all, the faculty of Mind also
must have some high use and destiny. That use must depend on its place in the ascent and in the return and that
destiny must be a fulfilment and transfiguration, not a rooting out or an annulling.
\par We perceive, then, these three steps in Nature, a bodily life which is the basis of our existence here in the
material world, a mental life into which we emerge and by which we raise the bodily to higher uses and enlarge it
into a greater completeness, and a divine existence which is at once the goal of the other two and returns upon
them to liberate them into their highest possibilities. Regarding none of them as either beyond our reach or below
our nature and the destruction of none of them as essential to the ultimate attainment, we accept this liberation
and fulfilment as part at least and a large and important part of the aim of Yoga.
Page 19

\par
\hn Chapter III
\par
\ht The Threefold Life
\par\drop Nature, then, is an evolution or progressive self-manifestation of an eternal and secret existence, with
three successive forms as her three steps of ascent. And we have consequently as the condition of all our
activities these three mutually interdependent possibilities, the bodily life, the mental existence and the veiled
spiritual being which is in the involution the cause of the others and in the evolution their result. Preserving and
perfecting the physical, fulfilling the mental, it is Nature's aim and it should be ours to unveil in the perfected body
and mind the transcendent activities of the Spirit. As the mental life does not abrogate but works for the elevation
and better utilisation of the bodily existence, so too the spiritual should not abrogate but transfigure our
intellectual, emotional, aesthetic and vital activities.
\par For man, the head of terrestrial Nature, the sole earthly frame in which her full evolution is possible, is a
triple birth. He has been given a living frame in which the body is the vessel and life the dynamic means of a
divine manifestation. His activity is centred in a progressive mind which aims at perfecting itself as well as the
house in which it dwells and the means of life that it uses, and is capable of awaking by a progressive
self-realisation to its own true nature as a form of the Spirit. He culminates in what he always really was, the
illumined and beatific spirit which is intended at last to irradiate life and mind with its now concealed splendours.
\par Since this is the plan of the divine Energy in humanity, the whole method and aim of our existence must
work by the interaction of these three elements in the being. As a result of their separate formulation in Nature,
man has open to him a choice between three kinds of life, the ordinary material existence, a life of mental activity
and progress and the unchanging spiritual
Page 20

beatitude. But he can, as he progresses, combine these three forms, resolve their discords into a harmonious
rhythm and so create in himself the whole godhead, the perfect Man.
\par In ordinary Nature they have each their own characteristic and governing impulse.
\par The characteristic energy of bodily Life is not so much in progress as in persistence, not so much in
individual self-enlargement as in self-repetition. There is, indeed, in physical Nature a progression from type to
type, from the vegetable to the animal, from the animal to man; for even in inanimate Matter Mind is at work.
But once a type is marked off physically, the chief immediate preoccupation of the terrestrial Mother seems to
be to keep it in being by a constant reproduction. For Life always seeks immortality; but since individual form is
impermanent and only the idea of a form is permanent in the consciousness that creates the universe,—for there
it does not perish,—such constant reproduction is the only possible material immortality. Self-preservation,
self-repetition, self-multiplication are necessarily, then, the predominant instincts of all material existence.
Material life seems ever to move in a fixed cycle.
\par The characteristic energy of pure Mind is change, and the more our mentality acquires elevation and
organisation, the more this law of Mind assumes the aspect of a continual enlargement, improvement and better
arrangement of its gains and so of a continual passage from a smaller and simpler to a larger and more complex
perfection. For Mind, unlike bodily life, is infinite in its field, elastic in its expansion, easily variable in its
formations. Change, then, self-enlargement and self-improvement are its proper instincts. Mind too moves in
cycles, but these are ever-enlarging spirals. Its faith is perfectibility, its watchword is progress.
\par The characteristic law of Spirit is self-existent perfection and immutable infinity. It possesses always and in
its own right the immortality which is the aim of Life and the perfection which is the goal of Mind. The
attainment of the eternal and the realisation of that which is the same in all things and beyond all things, equally
blissful in universe and outside it, untouched by
Page 21

the imperfections and limitations of the forms and activities in which it dwells, are the glory of the spiritual life.
\par In each of these forms Nature acts both individually and collectively; for the Eternal affirms Himself equally
in the single form and in the group-existence, whether family, clan and nation or groupings dependent on less
physical principles or the supreme group of all, our collective humanity. Man also may seek his own individual
good from any or all of these spheres of activity, or identify himself in them with the collectivity and live for it, or,
rising to a truer perception of this complex universe, harmonise the individual realisation with the collective aim.
For as it is the right relation of the soul with the Supreme, while it is in the universe, neither to assert egoistically
its separate being nor to blot itself out in the Indefinable, but to realise its unity with the Divine and the world and
unite them in the individual, so the right relation of the individual with the collectivity is neither to pursue
egoistically his own material or mental progress or spiritual salvation without regard to his fellows, nor for the
sake of the community to suppress or maim his proper development, but to sum up in himself all its best and
completest possibilities and pour them out by thought, action and all other means on his surroundings so that the
whole race may approach nearer to the attainment of its supreme personalities.
\par It follows that the object of the material life must be to fulfil, above all things, the vital aim of Nature. The
whole aim of the material man is to live, to pass from birth to death with as much comfort or enjoyment as may
be on the way, but anyhow to live. He can subordinate this aim, but only to physical Nature's other instincts, the
reproduction of the individual and the conservation of the type in the family, class or community. Self,
domesticity, the accustomed order of the society and of the nation are the constituents of the material existence.
Its immense importance in the economy of Nature is self-evident, and commensurate is the importance of the
human type which represents it. He assures her of the safety of the framework she has made and of the orderly
continuance and conservation of her past gains.
\par But by that very utility such men and the life they lead are
Page 22

condemned to be limited, irrationally conservative and earth-bound. The customary routine, the customary
institutions, the inherited or habitual forms of thought,—these things are the life-breath of their nostrils. They
admit and jealously defend the changes compelled by the progressive mind in the past, but combat with equal zeal
the changes that are being made by it in the present. For to the material man the living progressive thinker is an
ideologue, dreamer or madman. The old Semites who stoned the living prophets and adored their memories when
dead, were the very incarnation of this instinctive and unintelligent principle in Nature. In the ancient Indian
distinction between the once born and the twice born, it is to this material man that the former description can be
applied. He does Nature's inferior works; he assures the basis for her higher activities; but not to him easily are
opened the glories of her second birth.
\par Yet he admits so much of spirituality as has been enforced on his customary ideas by the great religious
outbursts of the past and he makes in his scheme of society a place, venerable though not often effective, for the
priest or the learned theologian who can be trusted to provide him with a safe and ordinary spiritual pabulum. But
to the man who would assert for himself the liberty of spiritual experience and the spiritual life, he assigns, if he
admits him at all, not the vestment of the priest but the robe of the Sannyasin. Outside society let him exercise his
dangerous freedom. So he may even serve as a human lightning-rod receiving the electricity of the Spirit and
turning it away from the social edifice.
\par Nevertheless it is possible to make the material man and his life moderately progressive by imprinting on the
material mind the custom of progress, the habit of conscious change, the fixed idea of progression as a law of
life. The creation by this means of progressive societies in Europe is one of the greatest triumphs of Mind over
Matter. But the physical nature has its revenge; for the progress made tends to be of the grosser and more
outward kind and its attempts at a higher or a more rapid movement bring about great wearinesses, swift
exhaustions, startling recoils.
Page 23

\par It is possible also to give the material man and his life a moderate spirituality by accustoming him to regard in
a religious spirit all the institutions of life and its customary activities. The creation of such spiritualised
communities in the East has been one of the greatest triumphs of Spirit over Matter. Yet here, too, there is a
defect; for this often tends only to the creation of a religious temperament, the most outward form of spirituality.
Its higher manifestations, even the most splendid and puissant, either merely increase the number of souls drawn
out of social life and so impoverish it or disturb the society for a while by a momentary elevation. The truth is that
neither the mental effort nor the spiritual impulse can suffice, divorced from each other, to overcome the
immense resistance of material Nature. She demands their alliance in a complete effort before she will suffer a
complete change in humanity. But, usually, these two great agents are unwilling to make to each other the
necessary concessions.
\par The mental life concentrates on the aesthetic, the ethical and the intellectual activities. Essential mentality is
idealistic and a seeker after perfection. The subtle self, the brilliant Atman,
\note{Who dwells in Dream, the inly conscious, the enjoyer of abstractions, the Brilliant. Mandukya Upanishad
4.} is ever a dreamer. A dream of perfect beauty, perfect conduct, perfect Truth, whether seeking new forms of
the Eternal or revitalising the old, is the very soul of pure mentality. But it knows not how to deal with the
resistance of Matter. There it is hampered and inefficient, works by bungling experiments and has either to
withdraw from the struggle or submit to the grey actuality. Or else, by studying the material life and accepting
the conditions of the contest, it may succeed, but only in imposing temporarily some artificial system which
infinite Nature either rends and casts aside or disfigures out of recognition or by withdrawing her assent leaves
as the corpse of a dead ideal. Few and far between have been those realisations of the dreamer in Man which
the world has gladly accepted, looks back to with a fond memory and seeks, in its elements, to cherish.
Page 24

\par When the gulf between actual life and the temperament of the thinker is too great, we see as the result a
sort of withdrawing of the Mind from life in order to act with a greater freedom in its own sphere. The poet living
among his brilliant visions, the artist absorbed in his art, the philosopher thinking out the problems of the intellect
in his solitary chamber, the scientist, the scholar caring only for their studies and their experiments, were often in
former days, are even now not unoften the Sannyasins of the intellect. To the work they have done for humanity,
all its past bears record.
\par But such seclusion is justified only by some special activity. Mind finds fully its force and action only when it
casts itself upon life and accepts equally its possibilities and its resistances as the means of a greater
self-perfection. In the struggle with the difficulties of the material world the ethical development of the individual
is firmly shaped and the great schools of conduct are formed; by contact with the facts of life Art attains to
vitality, Thought assures its abstractions, the generalisations of the philosopher base themselves on a stable
foundation of science and experience.
\par This mixing with life may, however, be pursued for the sake of the individual mind and with an entire
indifference to the forms of the material existence or the uplifting of the race. This indifference is seen at its
highest in the Epicurean discipline and is not entirely absent from the Stoic; and even altruism does the works of
compassion more often for its own sake than for the sake of the world it helps. But this too is a limited fulfilment.
The progressive mind is seen at its noblest when it strives to elevate the whole race to its own level whether by
sowing broadcast the image of its own thought and fulfilment or by changing the material life of the race into
fresh forms, religious, intellectual, social or political, intended to represent more nearly that ideal of truth, beauty,
justice, righteousness with which the man's own soul is illumined. Failure in such a field matters little; for the
mere attempt is dynamic and creative. The struggle of Mind to elevate life is the promise and condition of the
conquest of life by that which is higher even than Mind.
Page 25

\par That highest thing, the spiritual existence, is concerned with what is eternal but not therefore entirely aloof
from the transient. For the spiritual man the mind's dream of perfect beauty is realised in an eternal love, beauty
and delight that has no dependence and is equal behind all objective appearances; its dream of perfect Truth in
the supreme, self-existent, self-apparent and eternal Verity which never varies, but explains and is the secret of
all variations and the goal of all progress; its dream of perfect action in the omnipotent and self-guiding Law that
is inherent for ever in all things and translates itself here in the rhythm of the worlds. What is fugitive vision or
constant effort of creation in the brilliant Self is an eternally existing Reality in the Self that knows
\note{The Unified, in whom conscious thought is concentrated, who is all delight and enjoyer of delight, the
Wise.\sdots . . .  He is the Lord of all, the Omniscient, the inner Guide. Mandukya Upanishad 5, 6.} and is the
Lord.
\par But if it is often difficult for the mental life to accommodate itself to the dully resistant material activity, how
much more difficult must it seem for the spiritual existence to live on in a world that appears full not of the Truth
but of every lie and illusion, not of Love and Beauty but of an encompassing discord and ugliness, not of the Law
of Truth but of victorious selfishness and sin? Therefore the spiritual life tends easily in the saint and Sannyasin
to withdraw from the material existence and reject it either wholly and physically or in the spirit. It sees this
world as the kingdom of evil or of ignorance and the eternal and divine either in a far-off heaven or beyond
where there is no world and no life. It separates itself inwardly, if not also physically, from the world's impurities;
it asserts the spiritual reality in a spotless isolation. This withdrawal renders an invaluable service to the material
life itself by forcing it to regard and even to bow down to something that is the direct negation of its own petty
ideals, sordid cares and egoistic self-content.
\par But the work in the world of so supreme a power as spiritual force cannot be thus limited. The spiritual life
also can return upon the material and use it as a means of its own greater
Page 26

fullness. Refusing to be blinded by the dualities, the appearances, it can seek in all appearances whatsoever the
vision of the same Lord, the same eternal Truth, Beauty, Love, Delight. The Vedantic formula of the Self in all
things, all things in the Self and all things as becomings of the Self is the key to this richer and all-embracing
Yoga.
\par But the spiritual life, like the mental, may thus make use of this outward existence for the benefit of the
individual with a perfect indifference to any collective uplifting of the merely symbolic world which it uses. Since
the Eternal is for ever the same in all things and all things the same to the Eternal, since the exact mode of action
and the result are of no importance compared with the working out in oneself of the one great realisation, this
spiritual indifference accepts no matter what environment, no matter what action, dispassionately, prepared to
retire as soon as its own supreme end is realised. It is so that many have understood the ideal of the Gita. Or else
the inner love and bliss may pour itself out on the world in good deeds, in service, in compassion, the inner Truth
in the giving of knowledge, without therefore attempting the transformation of a world which must by its
inalienable nature remain a battle-field of the dualities, of sin and virtue, of truth and error, of joy and suffering.
\par But if Progress also is one of the chief terms of world-existence and a progressive manifestation of the
Divine the true sense of Nature, this limitation also is invalid. It is possible for the spiritual life in the world, and it
is its real mission, to change the material life into its own image, the image of the Divine. Therefore, besides the
great solitaries who have sought and attained their self-liberation, we have the great spiritual teachers who have
also liberated others and, supreme of all, the great dynamic souls who, feeling themselves stronger in the might of
the Spirit than all the forces of the material life banded together, have thrown themselves upon the world,
grappled with it in a loving wrestle and striven to compel its consent to its own transfiguration. Ordinarily, the
effort is concentrated on a mental and moral change in humanity, but it may extend itself
Page 27

also to the alteration of the forms of our life and its institutions so that they too may be a better mould for the
inpourings of the Spirit. These attempts have been the supreme landmarks in the progressive development of
human ideals and the divine preparation of the race. Every one of them, whatever its outward results, has left
Earth more capable of Heaven and quickened in its tardy movements the evolutionary Yoga of Nature.
\par In India, for the last thousand years and more, the spiritual life and the material have existed side by side to
the exclusion of the progressive mind. Spirituality has made terms for itself with Matter by renouncing the
attempt at general progress. It has obtained from society the right of free spiritual development for all who
assume some distinctive symbol, such as the garb of the Sannyasin, the recognition of that life as man's goal and
those who live it as worthy of an absolute reverence, and the casting of society itself into such a religious mould
that its most customary acts should be accompanied by a formal reminder of the spiritual symbolism of life and
its ultimate destination. On the other hand, there was conceded to society the right of inertia and immobile
self-conservation. The concession destroyed much of the value of the terms. The religious mould being fixed, the
formal reminder tended to become a routine and to lose its living sense. The constant attempts to change the
mould by new sects and religions ended only in a new routine or a modification of the old; for the saving element
of the free and active mind had been exiled. The material life, handed over to the Ignorance, the purposeless and
endless duality, became a leaden and dolorous yoke from which flight was the only escape.
\par The schools of Indian Yoga lent themselves to the compromise. Individual perfection or liberation was made
the aim, seclusion of some kind from the ordinary activities the condition, the renunciation of life the culmination.
The teacher gave his knowledge only to a small circle of disciples. Or if a wider movement was attempted, it
was still the release of the individual soul that remained the aim. The pact with an immobile society was, for the
most part, observed.
\par The utility of the compromise in the then actual state of the
Page 28

world cannot be doubted. It secured in India a society which lent itself to the preservation and the worship of
spirituality, a country apart in which as in a fortress the highest spiritual ideal could maintain itself in its most
absolute purity unoverpowered by the siege of the forces around it. But it was a compromise, not an absolute
victory. The material life lost the divine impulse to growth, the spiritual preserved by isolation its height and purity,
but sacrificed its full power and serviceableness to the world. Therefore, in the divine Providence the country of
the Yogins and the Sannyasins has been forced into a strict and imperative contact with the very element it had
rejected, the element of the progressive Mind, so that it might recover what was now wanting to it.
\par We have to recognise once more that the individual exists not in himself alone but in the collectivity and that
individual perfection and liberation are not the whole sense of God's intention in the world. The free use of our
liberty includes also the liberation of others and of mankind; the perfect utility of our perfection is, having realised
in ourselves the divine symbol, to reproduce, multiply and ultimately universalise it in others.
\par Therefore from a concrete view of human life in its threefold potentialities we come to the same conclusion
that we had drawn from an observation of Nature in her general workings and the three steps of her evolution.
And we begin to perceive a complete aim for our synthesis of Yoga.
\par Spirit is the crown of universal existence; Matter is its basis; Mind is the link between the two. Spirit is that
which is eternal; Mind and Matter are its workings. Spirit is that which is concealed and has to be revealed; mind
and body are the means by which it seeks to reveal itself. Spirit is the image of the Lord of the Yoga; mind and
body are the means He has provided for reproducing that image in phenomenal existence. All Nature is an
attempt at a progressive revelation of the concealed Truth, a more and more successful reproduction of the
divine image.
\par But what Nature aims at for the mass in a slow evolution, Yoga effects for the individual by a rapid
revolution. It works by a quickening of all her energies, a sublimation of all her
Page 29

faculties. While she develops the spiritual life with difficulty and has constantly to fall back from it for the sake of
her lower realisations, the sublimated force, the concentrated method of Yoga can attain directly and carry with
it the perfection of the mind and even, if she will, the perfection of the body. Nature seeks the Divine in her own
symbols: Yoga goes beyond Nature to the Lord of Nature, beyond universe to the Transcendent and can return
with the transcendent light and power, with the fiat of the Omnipotent.
\par But their aim is one in the end. The generalisation of Yoga in humanity must be the last victory of Nature
over her own delays and concealments. Even as now by the progressive mind in Science she seeks to make all
mankind fit for the full development of the mental life, so by Yoga must she inevitably seek to make all mankind
fit for the higher evolution, the second birth, the spiritual existence. And as the mental life uses and perfects the
material, so will the spiritual use and perfect the material and the mental existence as the instruments of a divine
self-expression. The ages when that is accomplished, are the legendary Satya or Krita
\note{Satya means Truth; Krita, effected or completed.} Yugas, the ages of the Truth manifested in the symbol,
of the great work done when Nature in mankind, illumined, satisfied and blissful, rests in the culmination of her
endeavour.
\par It is for man to know her meaning, no longer misunderstanding, vilifying or misusing the universal Mother,
and to aspire always by her mightiest means to her highest ideal.
Page 30

\par
\hn Chapter IV
\par
\ht The Systems of Yoga
\par\drop These relations between the different psychological divisions of the human being and these various
utilities and objects of effort founded on them, such as we have seen them in our brief survey of the natural
evolution, we shall find repeated in the fundamental principles and methods of the different schools of Yoga. And
if we seek to combine and harmonise their central practices and their predominant aims, we shall find that the
basis provided by Nature is still our natural basis and the condition of their synthesis.
\par In one respect Yoga exceeds the normal operation of cosmic Nature and climbs beyond her. For the aim of
the Universal Mother is to embrace the Divine in her own play and creations and there to realise It. But in the
highest flights of Yoga she reaches beyond herself and realises the Divine in Itself exceeding the universe and
even standing apart from the cosmic play. Therefore by some it is supposed that this is not only the highest but
also the one true or exclusively preferable object of Yoga.
\par Yet it is always through something which she has formed in her evolution that Nature thus overpasses her
evolution. It is the individual heart that by sublimating its highest and purest emotions attains to the transcendent
Bliss or the ineffable Nirvana, the individual mind that by converting its ordinary functionings into a knowledge
beyond mentality knows its oneness with the Ineffable and merges its separate existence in that transcendent
unity. And always it is the individual, the Self conditioned in its experience by Nature and working through her
formations, that attains to the Self unconditioned, free and transcendent.
\par In practice three conceptions are necessary before there can be any possibility of Yoga; there must be, as it
were, three consenting parties to the effort,—God, Nature and the \NH human soul or, in more abstract
language, the Transcendental, the \NH Universal
Page 31

and the Individual. If the individual and Nature are left to themselves, the one is bound to the other and unable to
exceed appreciably her lingering march. Something transcendent is needed, free from her and greater, which will
act upon us and her, attracting us upward to Itself and securing from her by good grace or by force her consent
to the individual ascension.
\par It is this truth which makes necessary to every philosophy of Yoga the conception of the Ishwara, Lord,
supreme Soul or supreme Self, towards whom the effort is directed and who gives the illuminating touch and the
strength to attain. Equally true is the complementary idea so often enforced by the Yoga of devotion that as the
Transcendent is necessary to the individual and sought after by him, so also the individual is necessary in a sense
to the Transcendent and sought after by It. If the Bhakta seeks and yearns after Bhagavan, Bhagavan also
seeks and yearns after the Bhakta.
\note{Bhakta, the devotee or lover of God; Bhagavan, God, the Lord of Love and Delight. The third term of the
trinity is Bhagavat, the divine revelation of Love.} There can be no Yoga of knowledge without a human seeker
of the knowledge, the supreme subject of knowledge and the divine use by the individual of the universal faculties
of knowledge; no Yoga of devotion without the human God-lover, the supreme object of love and delight and the
divine use by the individual of the universal faculties of spiritual, emotional and aesthetic enjoyment; no Yoga of
works without the human worker, the supreme Will, Master of all works and sacrifices, and the divine use by the
individual of the universal faculties of power and action. However Monistic may be our intellectual conception of
the highest truth of things, in practice we are compelled to accept this omnipresent Trinity.
\par For the contact of the human and individual consciousness with the divine is the very essence of Yoga.
Yoga is the union of that which has become separated in the play of the universe with its own true self, origin
and universality. The contact may take place at any point of the complex and intricately organised consciousness
which we call our personality. It may be effected in the physical through the body; in the vital through the action
of
Page 32

those functionings which determine the state and the experiences of our nervous being; through the mentality,
whether by means of the emotional heart, the active will or the understanding mind, or more largely by a general
conversion of the mental consciousness in all its activities. It may equally be accomplished through a direct
awakening to the universal or transcendent Truth and Bliss by the conversion of the central ego in the mind. And
according to the point of contact that we choose will be the type of the Yoga that we practise.
\par For if, leaving aside the complexities of their particular processes, we fix our regard on the central principle
of the chief schools of Yoga still prevalent in India, we find that they arrange themselves in an ascending order
which starts from the lowest rung of the ladder, the body, and ascends to the direct contact between the
individual soul and the transcendent and universal Self. Hathayoga selects the body and the vital functionings as
its instruments of perfection and realisation; its concern is with the gross body. Rajayoga selects the mental being
in its different parts as its lever-power; it concentrates on the subtle body. The triple Path of Works, of Love and
of Knowledge uses some part of the mental being, will, heart or intellect as a starting-point and seeks by its
conversion to arrive at the liberating Truth, Beatitude and Infinity which are the nature of the spiritual life. Its
method is a direct commerce between the human Purusha in the individual body and the divine Purusha who
dwells in every body and yet transcends all form and name.
\par Hathayoga aims at the conquest of the life and the body whose combination in the food sheath and the vital
vehicle constitutes, as we have seen, the gross body and whose equilibrium is the foundation of all Nature's
workings in the human being. The equilibrium established by Nature is sufficient for the normal egoistic life; it is
insufficient for the purpose of the Hathayogin. For it is calculated on the amount of vital or dynamic force
necessary to drive the physical engine during the normal span of human life and to perform more or less
adequately the various workings demanded of it by the individual life inhabiting this frame and the
world-environment by which it is conditioned.
Page 33

Hathayoga therefore seeks to rectify Nature and establish another equilibrium by which the physical frame will
be able to sustain the inrush of an increasing vital or dynamic force of Prana indefinite, almost infinite in its
quantity or intensity. In Nature the equilibrium is based upon the individualisation of a limited quantity and force
of the Prana; more than that the individual is by personal and hereditary habit unable to bear, use or control. In
Hathayoga, the equilibrium opens a door to the universalisation of the individual vitality by admitting into the body,
containing, using and controlling a much less fixed and limited action of the universal energy.
\par The chief processes of Hathayoga are \s{\=asana} and \s{pr\=a\,n\=ay\=ama}. By its numerous \sforced{\=asanas} or
fixed postures it first cures the body of that restlessness which is a sign of its inability to contain without working
them off in action and movement the vital forces poured into it from the universal Life-Ocean, gives to it an
extraordinary health, force and suppleness and seeks to liberate it from the habits by which it is subjected to
ordinary physical Nature and kept within the narrow bounds of her normal operations. In the ancient tradition of
Hathayoga it has always been supposed that this conquest could be pushed so far even as to conquer to a great
extent the force of gravitation. By various subsidiary but elaborate processes the Hathayogin next contrives to
keep the body free from all impurities and the nervous system unclogged for those exercises of respiration which
are his most important instruments. These are called \s{pr\=a\,n\=ay\=ama}, the control of the breath or vital power; for
breathing is the chief physical functioning of the vital forces. Pranayama, for the Hathayogin, serves a double
purpose. First, it completes the perfection of the body. The vitality is liberated from many of the ordinary
necessities of physical Nature; robust health, prolonged youth, often an extraordinary longevity are attained. On
the other hand, Pranayama awakens the coiled-up serpent of the Pranic dynamism in the vital sheath and opens
to the Yogin fields of consciousness, ranges of experience, abnormal faculties denied to the ordinary human life
while it puissantly intensifies such normal powers and faculties as he already \NH possesses.
Page 34

These advantages can be farther secured and emphasised by other subsidiary processes open to the Hathayogin.
\par The results of Hathayoga are thus striking to the eye and impose easily on the vulgar or physical mind. And
yet at the end we may ask what we have gained at the end of all this stupendous labour. The object of physical
Nature, the preservation of the mere physical life, its highest perfection, even in a certain sense the capacity of a
greater enjoyment of physical living have been carried out on an abnormal scale. But the weakness of
Hathayoga is that its laborious and difficult processes make so great a demand on the time and energy and
impose so complete a severance from the ordinary life of men that the utilisation of its results for the life of the
world becomes either impracticable or is extraordinarily restricted. If in return for this loss we gain another life in
another world within, the mental, the dynamic, these results could have been acquired through other systems,
through Rajayoga, through Tantra, by much less laborious methods and held on much less exacting terms. On the
other hand the physical results, increased vitality, prolonged youth, health, longevity are of small avail if they must
be held by us as misers of ourselves, apart from the common life, for their own sake, not utilised, not thrown into
the common sum of the world's activities. Hathayoga attains large results, but at an exorbitant price and to very
little purpose.
\par Rajayoga takes a higher flight. It aims at the liberation and perfection not of the bodily, but of the mental
being, the control of the emotional and sensational life, the mastery of the whole apparatus of thought and
consciousness. It fixes its eyes on the \s{citta}, that stuff of mental consciousness in which all these activities
arise, and it seeks, even as Hathayoga with its physical material, first to purify and to tranquillise. The normal
state of man is a condition of trouble and disorder, a kingdom either at war with itself or badly governed; for the
lord, the Purusha, is subjected to his ministers, the faculties, subjected even to his subjects, the instruments of
sensation, emotion, action, enjoyment. Swarajya, self-rule, must be substituted for this subjection. First, therefore,
the powers of order must be helped to overcome
Page 35

the powers of disorder. The preliminary movement of Rajayoga is a careful self-discipline by which good habits
of mind are substituted for the lawless movements that indulge the lower nervous being. By the practice of truth,
by renunciation of all forms of egoistic seeking, by abstention from injury to others, by purity, by constant
meditation and inclination to the divine Purusha who is the true lord of the mental kingdom, a pure, glad, clear
state of mind and heart is established.
\par This is the first step only. Afterwards, the ordinary activities of the mind and sense must be entirely quieted
in order that the soul may be free to ascend to higher states of consciousness and acquire the foundation for a
perfect freedom and self-mastery. But Rajayoga does not forget that the disabilities of the ordinary mind proceed
largely from its subjection to the reactions of the nervous system and the body. It adopts therefore from the
Hathayogic system its devices of \s{\=asana} and \s{pr\=a\,n\=ay\=ama}, but reduces their multiple and elaborate forms in
each case to one simplest and most directly effective process sufficient for its own immediate object. Thus it
gets rid of the Hathayogic complexity and cumbrousness while it utilises the swift and powerful efficacy of its
methods for the control of the body and the vital functions and for the awakening of that internal dynamism, full
of a latent supernormal faculty, typified in Yogic terminology by the \s{ku\,n\,dalin\=i}, the coiled and sleeping serpent
of Energy within. This done, the system proceeds to the perfect quieting of the restless mind and its elevation to
a higher plane through concentration of mental force by the successive stages which lead to the utmost inner
concentration or ingathered state of the consciousness which is called Samadhi.
\par By Samadhi, in which the mind acquires the capacity of withdrawing from its limited waking activities into
freer and higher states of consciousness, Rajayoga serves a double purpose. It compasses a pure mental action
liberated from the confusions of the outer consciousness and passes thence to the higher supra-mental planes on
which the individual soul enters into its true spiritual existence. But also it acquires the capacity of that free and
concentrated energising of consciousness on
Page 36

its object which our philosophy asserts as the primary cosmic energy and the method of divine action upon the
world. By this capacity the Yogin, already possessed of the highest supra-cosmic knowledge and experience in
the state of trance, is able in the waking state to acquire directly whatever knowledge and exercise whatever
mastery may be useful or necessary to his activities in the objective world. For the ancient system of Rajayoga
aimed not only at Swarajya, self-rule or subjective empire, the entire control by the subjective consciousness of
all the states and activities proper to its own domain, but included Samrajya as well, outward empire, the control
by the subjective consciousness of its outer activities and environment.
\par We perceive that as Hathayoga, dealing with the life and body, aims at the supernormal perfection of the
physical life and its capacities and goes beyond it into the domain of the mental life, so Rajayoga, operating with
the mind, aims at a supernormal perfection and enlargement of the capacities of the mental life and goes beyond
it into the domain of the spiritual existence. But the weakness of the system lies in its excessive reliance on
abnormal states of trance. This limitation leads first to a certain aloofness from the physical life which is our
foundation and the sphere into which we have to bring our mental and spiritual gains. Especially is the spiritual
life, in this system, too much associated with the state of Samadhi. Our object is to make the spiritual life and its
experiences fully active and fully utilisable in the waking state and even in the normal use of the functions. But in
Rajayoga it tends to withdraw into a subliminal plane at the back of our normal experiences instead of
descending and possessing our whole existence.
\par The triple Path of devotion, knowledge and works attempts the province which Rajayoga leaves unoccupied.
It differs from Rajayoga in that it does not occupy itself with the elaborate training of the whole mental system as
the condition of perfection, but seizes on certain central principles, the intellect, the heart, the will, and seeks to
convert their normal operations by turning them away from their ordinary and external preoccupations and
activities and concentrating them on the Divine. It
Page 37

differs also in this,—and here from the point of view of an integral Yoga there seems to be a defect,—that it is
indifferent to mental and bodily perfection and aims only at purity as a condition of the divine realisation. A
second defect is that as actually practised it chooses one of the three parallel paths exclusively and almost in
antagonism to the others instead of effecting a synthetic harmony of the intellect, the heart and the will in an
integral divine realisation.
\par The Path of Knowledge aims at the realisation of the unique and supreme Self. It proceeds by the method of
intellectual reflection, \s{vic\=ara}, to right discrimination, \s{viveka}. It observes and distinguishes the different
elements of our apparent or phenomenal being and rejecting identification with each of them arrives at their
exclusion and separation in one common term as constituents of Prakriti, of phenomenal Nature, creations of
Maya, the phenomenal consciousness. So it is able to arrive at its right identification with the pure and unique
Self which is not mutable or perishable, not determinable by any phenomenon or combination of phenomena.
From this point the path, as ordinarily followed, leads to the rejection of the phenomenal worlds from the
consciousness as an illusion and the final immergence without return of the individual soul in the Supreme.
\par But this exclusive consummation is not the sole or inevitable result of the Path of Knowledge. For, followed
more largely and with a less individual aim, the method of Knowledge may lead to an active conquest of the
cosmic existence for the Divine no less than to a transcendence. The point of this departure is the realisation of
the supreme Self not only in one's own being but in all beings and, finally, the realisation of even the phenomenal
aspects of the world as a play of the divine consciousness and not something entirely alien to its true nature. And
on the \NH basis of this realisation a yet further enlargement is possible, the conversion of all forms of
knowledge, however mundane, into activities of the divine consciousness utilisable for the perception of the one
and unique Object of knowledge both in itself and through the play of its forms and symbols. Such a method
might well lead to the elevation of the whole range of human intellect
Page 38

and perception to the divine level, to its spiritualisation and to the justification of the cosmic travail of knowledge
in humanity.
\par The Path of Devotion aims at the enjoyment of the supreme Love and Bliss and utilises normally the
conception of the supreme Lord in His personality as the divine Lover and enjoyer of the universe. The world is
then realised as a play of the Lord, with our human life as its final stage, pursued through the different phases of
self-concealment and self-revelation. The principle of Bhakti Yoga is to utilise all the normal relations of human
life into which emotion enters and apply them no longer to transient worldly relations, but to the joy of the
All-Loving, the All-Beautiful and the All-Blissful. Worship and meditation are used only for the preparation and
increase of intensity of the divine relationship. And this Yoga is catholic in its use of all emotional relations, so
that even enmity and opposition to God, considered as an intense, impatient and perverse form of Love, is
conceived as a possible means of realisation and salvation. This path, too, as ordinarily practised, leads away
from world-existence to an absorption, of another kind than the Monist's, in the Transcendent and Supra-cosmic.
\par But, here too, the exclusive result is not inevitable. The Yoga itself provides a first corrective by not
confining the play of divine love to the relation between the supreme Soul and the individual, but extending it to a
common feeling and mutual worship between the devotees themselves united in the same realisation of the
supreme Love and Bliss. It provides a yet more general corrective in the realisation of the divine object of Love
in all beings not only human but animal, easily extended to all forms whatsoever. We can see how this larger
application of the Yoga of Devotion may be so used as to lead to the elevation of the whole range of human
emotion, sensation and aesthetic perception to the divine level, its spiritualisation and the justification of the
cosmic labour towards love and joy in our humanity.
\par The Path of Works aims at the dedication of every human activity to the supreme Will. It begins by the
renunciation of all egoistic aim for our works, all pursuit of action for an interested aim or for the sake of a
worldly result. By this renunciation it so
Page 39

purifies the mind and the will that we become easily conscious of the great universal Energy as the true doer of
all our actions and the Lord of that Energy as their ruler and director with the individual as only a mask, an
excuse, an instrument or, more positively, a conscious centre of action and phenomenal relation. The choice and
direction of the act is more and more consciously left to this supreme Will and this universal Energy. To That our
works as well as the results of our works are finally abandoned. The object is the release of the soul from its
bondage to appearances and to the reaction of phenomenal activities. Karmayoga is used, like the other paths, to
lead to liberation from phenomenal existence and a departure into the Supreme. But here too the exclusive result
is not inevitable. The end of the path may be, equally, a perception of the Divine in all energies, in all happenings,
in all activities, and a free and unegoistic participation of the soul in the cosmic action. So followed it will lead to
the elevation of all human will and activity to the divine level, its spiritualisation and the justification of the cosmic
labour towards freedom, power and perfection in the human being.
\par We can see also that in the integral view of things these three paths are one. Divine Love should normally
lead to the perfect knowledge of the Beloved by perfect intimacy, thus becoming a path of Knowledge, and to
divine service, thus becoming a path of Works. So also should perfect Knowledge lead to perfect Love and Joy
and a full acceptance of the works of That which is known; dedicated Works to the entire love of the Master of
the Sacrifice and the deepest knowledge of His ways and His being. It is in this triple path that we come most
readily to the absolute knowledge, love and service of the One in all beings and in the entire cosmic
manifestation.
Page 40

\par
\hn Chapter V
\par
\ht The Synthesis of the Systems
\par\drop By the very nature of the principal Yogic schools, each covering in its operations a part of the complex
human integer and attempting to bring out its highest possibilities, it will appear that a synthesis of all of them
largely conceived and applied might well result in an integral Yoga. But they are so disparate in their tendencies,
so highly specialised and elaborated in their forms, so long confirmed in the mutual opposition of their ideas and
methods that we do not easily find how we can arrive at their right union.
\par An undiscriminating combination in block would not be a synthesis, but a confusion. Nor would a successive
practice of each of them in turn be easy in the short span of our human life and with our limited energies, to say
nothing of the waste of labour implied in so cumbrous a process. Sometimes, indeed, Hathayoga and Rajayoga
are thus successively practised. And in a recent unique example, in the life of Ramakrishna Paramhansa, we see
a colossal spiritual capacity first driving straight to the divine realisation, taking, as it were, the kingdom of heaven
by violence, and then seizing upon one Yogic method after another and extracting the substance out of it with an
incredible rapidity, always to return to the heart of the whole matter, the realisation and possession of God by the
power of love, by the extension of inborn spirituality into various experience and by the spontaneous play of an
intuitive knowledge. Such an example cannot be generalised. Its object also was special and temporal, to
exemplify in the great and decisive experience of a master-soul the truth, now most necessary to humanity,
towards which a world long divided into jarring sects and schools is with difficulty labouring, that all sects are
forms and fragments of a single integral truth and all disciplines labour in their different ways towards one
supreme experience. To know, be and possess
Page 41

the Divine is the one thing needful and it includes or leads up to all the rest; towards this sole good we have to
drive and this attained, all the rest that the divine Will chooses for us, all necessary form and manifestation, will
be added.
\par The synthesis we propose cannot, then, be arrived at \NH either by combination in mass or by successive
practice. It must therefore be effected by neglecting the forms and outsides of the Yogic disciplines and seizing
rather on some central principle common to all which will include and utilise in the right place and proportion their
particular principles, and on some central dynamic force which is the common secret of their divergent methods
and capable therefore of organising a natural selection and combination of their varied energies and different
utilities. This was the aim which we set before ourselves at first when we entered upon our comparative
examination of the methods of Nature and the methods of Yoga and we now return to it with the possibility of
hazarding some definite solution.
\par We observe, first, that there still exists in India a remarkable Yogic system which is in its nature synthetical
and starts from a great central principle of Nature, a great dynamic force of Nature; but it is a Yoga apart, not a
synthesis of other schools. This system is the way of the Tantra. Owing to certain of its developments Tantra
has fallen into discredit with those who are not Tantrics; and especially owing to the developments of its
left-hand path, the Vama Marga, which not content with exceeding the duality of virtue and sin and instead of
replacing them by spontaneous rightness of action seemed, sometimes, to make a method of self-indulgence, a
method of unrestrained social immorality. Nevertheless, in its origin, Tantra was a great and puissant system
founded upon ideas which were at least partially true. Even its twofold division into the right-hand and left-hand
paths, Dakshina Marga and Vama Marga, started from a certain profound perception. In the ancient symbolic
sense of the words Dakshina and Vama, it was the distinction between the way of Knowledge and the way of
Ananda,—Nature in man liberating itself by right discrimination in power and practice of its own energies,
elements and potentialities and Nature in man
Page 42

liberating itself by joyous acceptance in power and practice of its own energies, elements and potentialities. But
in both paths there was in the end an obscuration of principles, a deformation of symbols and a fall.
\par If, however, we leave aside, here also, the actual methods and practices and seek for the central principle,
we find, first, that Tantra expressly differentiates itself from the Vedic methods of Yoga. In a sense, all the
schools we have hitherto examined are Vedantic in their principle; their force is in knowledge, their method is
knowledge, though it is not always discernment by the intellect, but may be, instead, the knowledge of the heart
expressed in love and faith or a knowledge in the will working out through action. In all of them the lord of the
Yoga is the Purusha, the Conscious Soul that knows, observes, attracts, governs. But in Tantra it is rather
Prakriti, the Nature-Soul, the Energy, the Will-in-Power executive in the universe. It was by learning and
applying the intimate secrets of this Will-in-Power, its method, its Tantra, that the Tantric Yogin pursued the aims
of his discipline,—mastery, perfection, liberation, beatitude. Instead of drawing back from manifested Nature and
its difficulties, he confronted them, seized and conquered. But in the end, as is the general tendency of Prakriti,
Tantric Yoga largely lost its principle in its machinery and became a thing of formulae and occult mechanism still
powerful when rightly used but fallen from the clarity of their original intention.
\par We have in this central Tantric conception one side of the truth, the worship of the Energy, the Shakti, as the
sole effective force for all attainment. We get the other extreme in the Vedantic conception of the Shakti as a
power of Illusion and in the search after the silent inactive Purusha as the means of liberation from the
deceptions created by the active Energy. But in the integral conception the Conscious Soul is the Lord, the
Nature-Soul is his executive Energy. Purusha is of the nature of Sat, the being of conscious self-existence pure
and infinite; Shakti or Prakriti is of the nature of Chit,—it is power of the Purusha's self-conscious existence,
pure and infinite. The relation of the two exists between the poles of rest and action. When the Energy is
absorbed
Page 43

in the bliss of conscious self-existence, there is rest; when the Purusha pours itself out in the action of its Energy,
there is action, creation and the enjoyment or Ananda of becoming. But if Ananda is the creator and begetter of
all becoming, its method is Tapas or force of the Purusha's consciousness dwelling upon its own infinite
potentiality in existence and producing from it truths of conception or real Ideas, \s{vij\~n\=ana}, which, proceeding
from an omniscient and omnipotent Self-existence, have the surety of their own fulfilment and contain in
themselves the nature and law of their own becoming in the terms of mind, life and matter. The eventual
omnipotence of Tapas and the infallible fulfilment of the Idea are the very foundation of all Yoga. In man we
render these terms by Will and Faith,—a will that is eventually self-effective because it is of the substance of
Knowledge and a faith that is the reflex in the lower consciousness of a Truth or real Idea yet unrealised in the
manifestation. It is this self-certainty of the Idea which is meant by the Gita when it says, \s{yo yac-chraddha\,h
sa eva sa\,h}, “whatever is a man's faith or the sure Idea in him, that he becomes.”
\par We see, then, what from the psychological point of view,—and Yoga is nothing but practical psychology,—is
the conception of Nature from which we have to start. It is the self-fulfilment of the Purusha through his Energy.
But the movement of Nature is twofold, higher and lower, or, as we may choose to term it, divine and undivine.
The distinction exists indeed for practical purposes only; for there is nothing that is not divine, and in a larger
view it is as meaningless, verbally, as the distinction between natural and supernatural, for all things that are are
natural. All things are in Nature and all things are in God. But, for practical purposes, there is a real distinction.
The lower Nature, that which we know and are and must remain so long as the faith in us is not changed, acts
through limitation and division, is of the nature of Ignorance and culminates in the life of the ego; but the higher
Nature, that to which we aspire, acts by unification and transcendence of limitation, is of the nature of
Knowledge and culminates in the life divine. The passage from the lower to the higher is the aim of Yoga; and
this passage
Page 44

may effect itself by the rejection of the lower and escape into the higher,—the ordinary view-point,—or by the
transformation of the lower and its elevation to the higher Nature. It is this, rather, that must be the aim of an
integral Yoga.
\par But in either case it is always through something in the lower that we must rise into the higher existence, and
the schools of Yoga each select their own point of departure or their own gate of escape. They specialise certain
activities of the lower Prakriti and turn them towards the Divine. But the normal action of Nature in us is an
integral movement in which the full complexity of all our elements is affected by and affects all our
environments. The whole of life is the Yoga of Nature. The Yoga that we seek must also be an integral action of
Nature, and the whole difference between the Yogin and the natural man will be this, that the Yogin seeks to
substitute in himself for the integral action of the lower Nature working in and by ego and division the integral
action of the higher Nature working in and by God and unity. If indeed our aim be only an escape from the world
to God, synthesis is unnecessary and a waste of time; for then our sole practical aim must be to find out one path
out of the thousand that lead to God, one shortest possible of short cuts, and not to linger exploring different paths
that end in the same goal. But if our aim be a transformation of our integral being into the terms of
God-existence, it is then that a synthesis becomes necessary.
\par The method we have to pursue, then, is to put our whole conscious being into relation and contact with the
Divine and to call Him in to transform our entire being into His. Thus in a sense God Himself, the real Person in
us, becomes the sadhaka of the sadhana
\note{\s{S\=adhana}, the practice by which perfection, \s{siddhi}, is attained; \s{s\=adhaka}, the Yogin who seeks
by that practice the \s{siddhi}.} as well as the Master of the Yoga by whom the lower personality is used as the
centre of a divine transfiguration and the instrument of its own perfection. In effect, the pressure of the Tapas,
the force of consciousness in us dwelling in the Idea of the divine Nature upon that which we are in our entirety,
produces
Page 45

its own realisation. The divine and all-knowing and all-effecting descends upon the limited and obscure,
progressively illumines and energises the whole lower nature and substitutes its own action for all the terms of
the inferior human light and mortal activity.
\par In psychological fact this method translates itself into the progressive surrender of the ego with its whole
field and all its apparatus to the Beyond-ego with its vast and incalculable but always inevitable workings.
Certainly, this is no short cut or easy sadhana. It requires a colossal faith, an absolute courage and above all an
unflinching patience. For it implies three stages of which only the last can be wholly blissful or rapid,—the
attempt of the ego to enter into contact with the Divine, the wide, full and therefore laborious preparation of the
whole lower Nature by the divine working to receive and become the higher Nature, and the eventual
transformation. In fact, however, the divine Strength, often unobserved and behind the veil, substitutes itself for
our weakness and supports us through all our failings of faith, courage and patience. It “makes the blind to see
and the lame to stride over the hills.” The intellect becomes aware of a Law that beneficently insists and a
succour that upholds; the heart speaks of a Master of all things and Friend of man or a universal Mother who
upholds through all stumblings. Therefore this path is at once the most difficult imaginable and yet, in comparison
with the magnitude of its effort and object, the most easy and sure of all.
\par There are three outstanding features of this action of the higher when it works integrally on the lower
nature. In the first place it does not act according to a fixed system and succession as in the specialised methods
of Yoga, but with a sort of free, scattered and yet gradually intensive and purposeful working determined by the
temperament of the individual in whom it operates, the helpful materials which his nature offers and the obstacles
which it presents to purification and perfection. In a sense, therefore, each man in this path has his own method
of Yoga. Yet are there certain broad lines of working common to all which enable us to construct not indeed a
routine system, but
Page 46

yet some kind of Shastra or scientific method of the synthetic Yoga.
\par Secondly, the process, being integral, accepts our nature such as it stands organised by our past evolution
and without rejecting anything essential compels all to undergo a divine change. Everything in us is seized by the
hands of a mighty Artificer and transformed into a clear image of that which it now seeks confusedly to present.
In that ever-progressive experience we begin to perceive how this lower manifestation is constituted and that
everything in it, however seemingly deformed or petty or vile, is the more or less distorted or imperfect figure of
some element or action in the harmony of the divine Nature. We begin to understand what the Vedic Rishis
meant when they spoke of the human forefathers fashioning the gods as a smith forges the crude material in his
smithy.
\par Thirdly, the divine Power in us uses all life as the means of this integral Yoga. Every experience and outer
contact with our world-environment, however trifling or however disastrous, is used for the work, and every
inner experience, even to the most repellent suffering or the most humiliating fall, becomes a step on the path to
perfection. And we recognise in ourselves with opened eyes the method of God in the world, His purpose of light
in the obscure, of might in the weak and fallen, of delight in what is grievous and miserable. We see the divine
method to be the same in the lower and in the higher working; only in the one it is pursued tardily and obscurely
through the subconscious in Nature, in the other it becomes swift and self-conscious and the instrument
confesses the hand of the Master. All life is a Yoga of Nature seeking to manifest God within itself. Yoga marks
the stage at which this effort becomes capable of self-awareness and therefore of right completion in the
individual. It is a gathering up and concentration of the movements dispersed and loosely combined in the lower
evolution.
\par An integral method and an integral result. First, an integral realisation of Divine Being; not only a realisation
of the One in its indistinguishable unity, but also in its multitude of aspects which are also necessary to the
complete knowledge of it by
Page 47

the relative consciousness; not only realisation of unity in the Self, but of unity in the infinite diversity of activities,
worlds and creatures.
\par Therefore, also, an integral liberation. Not only the freedom born of unbroken contact and identification of
the individual being in all its parts with the Divine, \sforced{s\=ayujya-mukti}, by which it can become
free
\note{As the Jivanmukta, who is entirely free even without dissolution of the bodily life in a final Samadhi.} even
in its separation, even in the duality; not only the \s{s\=alokya-mukti} by which the whole conscious existence
dwells in the same status of being as the Divine, in the state of Sachchidananda; but also the acquisition of the
divine nature by the transformation of this lower being into the human image of the Divine, \s{s\=adharmya-mukti},
and the complete and final release of all, the liberation of the consciousness from the transitory mould of the ego
and its unification with the One Being, universal both in the world and the individual and transcendentally one
both in the world and beyond all universe.
\par By this integral realisation and liberation, the perfect harmony of the results of Knowledge, Love and Works.
For there is attained the complete release from ego and identification in being with the One in all and beyond all.
But since the attaining consciousness is not limited by its attainment, we win also the unity in Beatitude and the
harmonised diversity in Love, so that all relations of the play remain possible to us even while we retain on the
heights of our being the eternal oneness with the Beloved. And by a similar wideness, being capable of a
freedom in spirit that embraces life and does not depend upon withdrawal from life, we are able to become
without egoism, bondage or reaction the channel in our mind and body for a divine action poured out freely upon
the world.
\par The divine existence is of the nature not only of freedom, but of purity, beatitude and perfection. An integral
purity which shall enable on the one hand the perfect reflection of the divine Being in ourselves and on the other
the perfect outpouring of its Truth and Law in us in the terms of life and through the right
Page 48

functioning of the complex instrument we are in our outer parts, is the condition of an integral liberty. Its result is
an integral beatitude, in which there becomes possible at once the Ananda of all that is in the world seen as
symbols of the Divine and the Ananda of that which is not-world. And it prepares the integral perfection of our
humanity as a type of the Divine in the conditions of the human manifestation, a perfection founded on a certain
free universality of being, of love and joy, of play of knowledge and of play of will in power and will in unegoistic
action. This integrality also can be attained by the integral Yoga.
\par Perfection includes perfection of mind and body, so that the highest results of Rajayoga and Hathayoga
should be contained in the widest formula of the synthesis finally to be effected by mankind. At any rate a full
development of the general mental and physical faculties and experiences attainable by humanity through Yoga
must be included in the scope of the integral method. Nor would these have any {\it raison d'\^etre} unless
employed for an integral mental and physical life. Such a mental and physical life would be in its nature a
translation of the spiritual existence into its right mental and physical values. Thus we would arrive at a synthesis
of the three degrees of Nature and of the three modes of human existence which she has evolved or is evolving.
We would include in the scope of our liberated being and perfected modes of activity the material life, our base,
and the mental life, our intermediate instrument.
\par Nor would the integrality to which we aspire be real or even possible, if it were confined to the individual.
Since our divine perfection embraces the realisation of ourselves in being, in life and in love through others as
well as through ourselves, the extension of our liberty and of its results in others would be the inevitable outcome
as well as the broadest utility of our liberation and perfection. And the constant and inherent attempt of such an
extension would be towards its increasing and ultimately complete generalisation in mankind.
\par The divinising of the normal material life of man and of his great secular attempt of mental and moral
self-culture in the individual and the race by this integralisation of a widely perfect
Page 49

spiritual existence would thus be the crown alike of our individual and of our common effort. Such a
consummation being no other than the kingdom of heaven within reproduced in the kingdom of heaven without,
would be also the true fulfilment of the great dream cherished in different terms by the world's religions.
\par The widest synthesis of perfection possible to thought is the sole effort entirely worthy of those whose
dedicated vision perceives that God dwells concealed in humanity.

\book
\part
\par
Page 50

\hn Part I
\par
\ht The Yoga of Divine Works

\chapter
\par
Page 51

\hn Chapter I
\par
\ht The Four Aids
\par\drop Yoga-siddhi, the perfection that comes from the practice of Yoga, can be best attained by the
combined \NH working of four great instruments. There is, first, the knowledge of the truths, principles, powers
and processes that govern the realisation—\sforced{\'s\=astra}. Next comes a patient and persistent action on the
lines laid down by this knowledge, the force of our personal effort—\sforced{uts\=aha}. There intervenes, third,
uplifting our knowledge and effort into the domain of spiritual experience, the direct suggestion, example and
influence of the Teacher—\sforced{guru}. Last comes the instrumentality of Time—\sforced{k\=ala}; for in all
things there is a cycle of their action and a period of the divine movement.
\par
\tstar
\par The supreme Shastra of the integral Yoga is the eternal Veda secret in the heart of every thinking and living
being. The lotus of the eternal knowledge and the eternal perfection is a bud closed and folded up within us. It
opens swiftly or gradually, petal by petal, through successive realisations, once the mind of man begins to turn
towards the Eternal, once his heart, no longer compressed and confined by attachment to finite appearances,
becomes enamoured, in whatever degree, of the Infinite. All life, all thought, all energising of the faculties, all
experiences passive or active, become thenceforward so many shocks which disintegrate the teguments of the
soul and remove the obstacles to the inevitable efflorescence. He who chooses the Infinite has been chosen by
the Infinite. He has received the divine touch without which there is no awakening, no opening of the spirit; but
once it is received, attainment is sure, whether conquered swiftly in the course of one human life or pursued
patiently through many
Page 53

stadia of the cycle of existence in the manifested universe.
\par Nothing can be taught to the mind which is not already concealed as potential knowledge in the unfolding
soul of the creature. So also all perfection of which the outer man is capable, is only a realising of the eternal
perfection of the Spirit within him. We know the Divine and become the Divine, because we are That already in
our secret nature. All teaching is a revealing, all becoming is an unfolding. Self-attainment is the secret;
self-knowledge and an increasing consciousness are the means and the process.
\par The usual agency of this revealing is the Word, the thing heard (\s{\'sruta}). The Word may come to us from
within; it may come to us from without. But in either case, it is only an agency for setting the hidden knowledge
to work. The word within may be the utterance of the inmost soul in us which is always open to the Divine; or it
may be the word of the secret and universal Teacher who is seated in the hearts of all. There are rare cases in
which none other is needed, for all the rest of the Yoga is an unfolding under that constant touch and guidance;
the lotus of the knowledge discloses itself from within by the power of irradiating effulgence which proceeds
from the Dweller in the lotus of the heart. Great indeed, but few are those to whom self-knowledge from within
is thus sufficient and who do not need to pass under the dominant influence of a written book or a living teacher.
\par Ordinarily, the Word from without, representative of the Divine, is needed as an aid in the work of
self-unfolding; and it may be either a word from the past or the more powerful word of the living Guru. In some
cases this representative word is only taken as a sort of excuse for the inner power to awaken and manifest; it is,
as it were, a concession of the omnipotent and omniscient Divine to the generality of a law that governs Nature.
Thus it is said in the Upanishads of Krishna, son of Devaki, that he received a word of the Rishi Ghora and had
the knowledge. So Ramakrishna, having attained by his own internal effort the central illumination, accepted
several teachers in the different paths of Yoga, but always showed in the manner and swiftness
Page 54

of his realisation that this acceptance was a concession to the general rule by which effective knowledge must
be received as by a disciple from a Guru.
\par But usually the representative influence occupies a much larger place in the life of the sadhaka. If the Yoga
is guided by a received written Shastra,—some Word from the past which embodies the experience of former
Yogins,—it may be practised either by personal effort alone or with the aid of a Guru. The spiritual knowledge is
then gained through meditation on the truths that are taught and it is made living and conscious by their realisation
in the personal experience; the Yoga proceeds by the results of prescribed methods taught in a Scripture or a
tradition and reinforced and illumined by the instructions of the Master. This is a narrower practice, but safe and
effective within its limits, because it follows a well-beaten track to a long familiar goal.
\par For the sadhaka of the integral Yoga it is necessary to remember that no written Shastra, however great its
authority or however large its spirit, can be more than a partial expression of the eternal Knowledge. He will use,
but never bind himself even by the greatest Scripture. Where the Scripture is profound, wide, catholic, it may
exercise upon him an influence for the highest good and of incalculable importance. It may be associated in his
experience with his awakening to crowning verities and his realisation of the highest experiences. His Yoga may
be governed for a long time by one Scripture or by several successively,—if it is in the line of the great Hindu
tradition, by the Gita, for example, the Upanishads, the Veda. Or it may be a good part of his development to
include in its material a richly varied experience of the truths of many Scriptures and make the future opulent
with all that is best in the past. But in the end he must take his station, or better still, if he can, always and from
the beginning he must live in his own soul beyond the limitations of the word that he uses. The Gita itself thus
declares that the Yogin in his progress must pass beyond the written Truth,—\s{\'sabdabrahm\=ativartate}—beyond
all that he has heard and all that he has yet to hear,—\s{\'srotavyasya \'srutasya ca}. For he is not
Page 55

the sadhaka of a book or of many books; he is a sadhaka of the Infinite.
\par Another kind of Shastra is not Scripture, but a statement of the science and methods, the effective principles
and way of working of the path of Yoga which the sadhaka elects to follow. Each path has its Shastra, either
written or traditional, passing from mouth to mouth through a long line of Teachers. In India a great authority, a
high reverence even is ordinarily attached to the written or traditional teaching. All the lines of the Yoga are
supposed to be fixed and the Teacher who has received the Shastra by tradition and realised it in practice guides
the disciple along the immemorial tracks. One often even hears the objection urged against a new practice, a
new Yogic teaching, the adoption of a new formula, “It is not according to the Shastra.” But neither in fact nor in
the actual practice of the Yogins is there really any such entire rigidity of an iron door shut against new truth,
fresh revelation, widened experience. The written or traditional teaching expresses the knowledge and
experiences of many centuries systematised, organised, made attainable to the beginner. Its importance and
utility are therefore immense. But a great freedom of variation and development is always practicable. Even so
highly scientific a system as Rajayoga can be practised on other lines than the organised method of Patanjali.
Each of the three paths of the \sforced{trim\=arga}
\note{The triple path of Knowledge, Devotion and Works.} breaks into many bypaths which meet again at the
goal. The general knowledge on which the Yoga depends is fixed, but the order, the succession, the devices, the
forms must be allowed to vary; for the needs and particular impulsions of the individual nature have to be
satisfied even while the general truths remain firm and constant.
\par An integral and synthetic Yoga needs especially not to be bound by any written or traditional Shastra; for
while it embraces the knowledge received from the past, it seeks to organise it anew for the present and the
future. An absolute liberty of experience and of the restatement of knowledge in new terms and new
combinations is the condition of its self-formation.
Page 56

Seeking to embrace all life in itself, it is in the position not of a pilgrim following the highroad to his destination,
but, to that extent at least, of a path-finder hewing his way through a virgin forest. For Yoga has long diverged
from life and the ancient systems which sought to embrace it, such as those of our Vedic forefathers, are far
away from us, expressed in terms which are no longer accessible, thrown into forms which are no longer
applicable. Since then mankind has moved forward on the current of eternal Time and the same problem has to
be approached from a new starting-point.
\par By this Yoga we not only seek the Infinite, but we call upon the Infinite to unfold himself in human life.
Therefore the Shastra of our Yoga must provide for an infinite liberty in the receptive human soul. A free
adaptability in the manner and the type of the individual's acceptance of the Universal and Transcendent into
himself is the right condition for the full spiritual life in man. Vivekananda, pointing out that the unity of all
religions must necessarily express itself by an increasing richness of variety in its forms, said once that the
perfect state of that essential unity would come when each man had his own religion, when not bound by sect or
traditional form he followed the free self-adaptation of his nature in its relations with the Supreme. So also one
may say that the perfection of the integral Yoga will come when each man is able to follow his own path of
Yoga, pursuing the development of his own nature in its upsurging towards that which transcends the nature. For
freedom is the final law and the last consummation.
\par Meanwhile certain general lines have to be formed which may help to guide the thought and practice of the
sadhaka. But these must take as much as possible the form of general truths, general statements of principle, the
most powerful broad directions of effort and development rather than a fixed system which has to be followed as
a routine. All Shastra is the outcome of past experience and a help to future experience. It is an aid and a partial
guide. It puts up signposts, gives the names of the main roads and the already explored directions, so that the
traveller may know whither and by what paths he is proceeding.
Page 57

\par The rest depends on personal effort and experience and upon the power of the Guide.
\par
\tstar
\par The development of the experience in its rapidity, its amplitude, the intensity and power of its results,
depends primarily, in the beginning of the path and long after, on the aspiration and personal effort of the
sadhaka. The process of Yoga is a turning of the human soul from the egoistic state of consciousness absorbed
in the outward appearances and attractions of things to a higher state in which the Transcendent and Universal
can pour itself into the individual mould and transform it. The first determining element of the siddhi is, therefore,
the intensity of the turning, the force which directs the soul inward. The power of aspiration of the heart, the
force of the will, the concentration of the mind, the perseverance and determination of the applied energy are the
measure of that intensity. The ideal sadhaka should be able to say in the Biblical phrase, “My zeal for the Lord
has eaten me up.” It is this zeal for the Lord,—\sforced{uts\=aha}, the zeal of the whole nature for its divine
results, \sforced{vy\=akulat\=a}, the heart's eagerness for the attainment of the Divine,—that devours the ego and
breaks up the limitations of its petty and narrow mould for the full and wide reception of that which it seeks, that
which, being universal, exceeds and, being transcendent, surpasses even the largest and highest individual self
and nature.
\par But this is only one side of the force that works for perfection. The process of the integral Yoga has three
stages, not indeed sharply distinguished or separate, but in a certain measure successive. There must be, first, the
effort towards at least an initial and enabling self-transcendence and contact with the Divine; next, the reception
of that which transcends, that with which we have gained communion, into ourselves for the transformation of
our whole conscious being; last, the utilisation of our transformed humanity as a divine centre in the world. So
long as the contact with the Divine is not in some considerable degree established, so long as there is not some
measure of sustained
Page 58

identity, \s{s\=ayujya}, the element of personal effort must normally predominate. But in proportion as this contact
establishes itself, the sadhaka must become conscious that a force other than his own, a force transcending his
egoistic endeavour and capacity, is at work in him and to this Power he learns progressively to submit himself
and delivers up to it the charge of his Yoga. In the end his own will and force become one with the higher
Power; he merges them in the divine Will and its transcendent and universal Force. He finds it thenceforward
presiding over the necessary transformation of his mental, vital and physical being with an impartial wisdom and
provident effectivity of which the eager and interested ego is not capable. It is when this identification and this
self-merging are complete that the divine centre in the world is ready. Purified, liberated, plastic, illumined, it can
begin to serve as a means for the direct action of a supreme Power in the larger Yoga of humanity or
superhumanity, of the earth's spiritual progression or its transformation.
\par Always indeed it is the higher Power that acts. Our sense of personal effort and aspiration comes from the
attempt of the egoistic mind to identify itself in a wrong and imperfect way with the workings of the divine Force.
It persists in applying to experience on a supernormal plane the ordinary terms of mentality which it applies to its
normal experiences in the world. In the world we act with the sense of egoism; we claim the universal forces
that work in us as our own; we claim as the effect of our personal will, wisdom, force, virtue the selective,
formative, progressive action of the Transcendent in this frame of mind, life and body. Enlightenment brings to us
the knowledge that the ego is only an instrument; we begin to perceive and feel that these things are our own in
the sense that they belong to our supreme and integral Self, one with the Transcendent, not to the instrumental
ego. Our limitations and distortions are our contribution to the working; the true power in it is the Divine's. When
the human ego realises that its will is a tool, its wisdom ignorance and childishness, its power an infant's groping,
its virtue a pretentious impurity, and learns to trust itself to that which transcends it, that is its salvation. The
Page 59

apparent freedom and \NH{self-assertion} of our personal being to which we are so profoundly attached,
conceal a most pitiable subjection to a thousand suggestions, impulsions, forces which we have made extraneous
to our little person. Our ego, boasting of freedom, is at every moment the slave, toy and puppet of countless
beings, powers, forces, influences in universal Nature. The self-abnegation of the ego in the Divine is its
self-fulfilment; its surrender to that which transcends it is its liberation from bonds and limits and its perfect
freedom.
\par But still, in the practical development, each of the three stages has its necessity and utility and must be given
its time or its place. It will not do, it cannot be safe or effective to begin with the last and highest alone. It would
not be the right course, either, to leap prematurely from one to another. For even if from the beginning we
recognise in mind and heart the Supreme, there are elements of the nature which long prevent the recognition
from becoming realisation. But without realisation our mental belief cannot become a dynamic reality; it is still
only a figure of knowledge, not a living truth, an idea, not yet a power. And even if realisation has begun, it may
be dangerous to imagine or to assume too soon that we are altogether in the hands of the Supreme or are acting
as his instrument. That assumption may introduce a calamitous falsity; it may produce a helpless inertia or,
magnifying the movements of the ego with the Divine Name, it may disastrously distort and ruin the whole
course of the Yoga. There is a period, more or less prolonged, of internal effort and struggle in which the
individual will has to reject the darkness and distortions of the lower nature and to put itself resolutely or
vehemently on the side of the divine Light. The mental energies, the heart's emotions, the vital desires, the very
physical being have to be compelled into the right attitude or trained to admit and answer to the right influences.
It is only then, only when this has been truly done, that the surrender of the lower to the higher can be effected,
because the sacrifice has become acceptable.
\par The personal will of the sadhaka has first to seize on the egoistic energies and turn them towards the light
and the right;
Page 60

once turned, he has still to train them to recognise that always, always to accept, always to follow that.
Progressing, he learns, still using the personal will, personal effort, personal energies, to employ them as
representatives of the higher Power and in conscious obedience to the higher Influence. Progressing yet farther,
his will, effort, energy become no longer personal and separate, but activities of that higher Power and Influence
at work in the individual. But there is still a sort of gulf or distance which necessitates an obscure process of
transit, not always accurate, sometimes even very distorting, between the divine Origin and the emerging human
current. At the end of the process, with the progressive disappearance of egoism and impurity and ignorance, this
last separation is removed; all in the individual becomes the divine working.
\par
\tstar
\par As the supreme Shastra of the integral Yoga is the eternal Veda secret in the heart of every man, so its
supreme Guide and Teacher is the inner Guide, the World-Teacher, \s{jagad-guru}, secret within us. It is he who
destroys our darkness by the resplendent light of his knowledge; that light becomes within us the increasing glory
of his own self-revelation. He discloses progressively in us his own nature of freedom, bliss, love, power,
immortal being. He sets above us his divine example as our ideal and transforms the lower existence into a
reflection of that which it contemplates. By the inpouring of his own influence and presence into us he enables
the individual being to attain to identity with the universal and transcendent.
\par What is his method and his system? He has no method and every method. His system is a natural
organisation of the highest processes and movements of which the nature is capable. Applying themselves even
to the pettiest details and to the actions the most insignificant in their appearance with as much care and
thoroughness as to the greatest, they in the end lift all into the Light and transform all. For in his Yoga there is
nothing too small to be used and nothing too great to be attempted. As the
Page 61

servant and disciple of the Master has no business with pride or egoism because all is done for him from above,
so also he has no right to despond because of his personal deficiencies or the stumblings of his nature. For the
Force that works in him is impersonal—or superpersonal—and infinite.
\par The full recognition of this inner Guide, Master of the Yoga, lord, light, enjoyer and goal of all sacrifice and
effort, is of the utmost importance in the path of integral perfection. It is immaterial whether he is first seen as an
impersonal Wisdom, Love and Power behind all things, as an Absolute manifesting in the relative and attracting
it, as one's highest Self and the highest Self of all, as a Divine Person within us and in the world, in one of his—or
her—numerous forms and names or as the ideal which the mind conceives. In the end we perceive that he is all
and more than all these things together. The mind's door of entry to the conception of him must necessarily vary
according to the past evolution and the present nature.
\par This inner Guide is often veiled at first by the very intensity of our personal effort and by the ego's
preoccupation with itself and its aims. As we gain in clarity and the turmoil of egoistic effort gives place to a
calmer self-knowledge, we recognise the source of the growing light within us. We recognise it retrospectively
as we realise how all our obscure and conflicting movements have been determined towards an end that we only
now begin to perceive, how even before our entrance into the path of the Yoga the evolution of our life has been
designedly led towards its turning-point. For now we begin to understand the sense of our struggles and efforts,
successes and failures. At last we are able to seize the meaning of our ordeals and sufferings and can appreciate
the help that was given us by all that hurt and resisted and the utility of our very falls and stumblings. We
recognise this divine leading afterwards, not retrospectively but immediately, in the moulding of our thoughts by a
transcendent Seer, of our will and actions by an all-embracing Power, of our emotional life by an all-attracting
and all-assimilating Bliss and Love. We recognise it too in a more personal relation that from the first touched or
at the last seizes us; we feel the
Page 62

eternal \NH presence of a supreme Master, Friend, Lover, Teacher. We recognise it in the essence of our being
as that develops into likeness and oneness with a greater and wider existence; for we perceive that this
miraculous development is not the result of our own efforts: an eternal Perfection is moulding us into its own
image. One who is the Lord or Ishwara of the Yogic philosophies, the Guide in the conscious being (\s{caitya
guru} or \s{antary\=amin}), the Absolute of the thinker, the Unknowable of the Agnostic, the universal Force of
the materialist, the supreme Soul and the supreme Shakti, the One who is differently named and imaged by the
religions, is the Master of our Yoga.
\par To see, know, become and fulfil this One in our inner selves and in all our outer nature, was always the
secret goal and becomes now the conscious purpose of our embodied existence. To be conscious of him in all
parts of our being and equally in all that the dividing mind sees as outside our being, is the consummation of the
individual consciousness. To be possessed by him and possess him in ourselves and in all things is the term of all
empire and mastery. To enjoy him in all experience of passivity and activity, of peace and of power, of unity and
of difference is the happiness which the Jiva, the individual soul manifested in the world, is obscurely seeking.
This is the entire definition of the aim of integral Yoga; it is the rendering in personal experience of the truth
which universal Nature has hidden in herself and which she travails to discover. It is the conversion of the human
soul into the divine soul and of natural life into divine living.
\par
\tstar
\par The surest way towards this integral fulfilment is to find the Master of the secret who dwells within us, open
ourselves constantly to the divine Power which is also the divine Wisdom and Love and trust to it to effect the
conversion. But it is difficult for the egoistic consciousness to do this at all at the beginning. And, if done at all, it
is still difficult to do it perfectly and in every strand of our nature. It is difficult at first because our
Page 63

egoistic habits of thought, of sensation, of feeling block up the avenues by which we can arrive at the perception
that is needed. It is difficult afterwards because the faith, the surrender, the courage requisite in this path are not
easy to the ego-clouded soul. The divine working is not the working which the egoistic mind desires or approves;
for it uses error in order to arrive at truth, suffering in order to arrive at bliss, imperfection in order to arrive at
perfection. The ego cannot see where it is being led; it revolts against the leading, loses confidence, loses
courage. These failings would not matter; for the divine Guide within is not offended by our revolt, not
discouraged by our want of faith or repelled by our weakness; he has the entire love of the mother and the entire
patience of the teacher. But by withdrawing our assent from the guidance we lose the consciousness, though not
all the actuality—not, in any case, the eventuality—of its benefit. And we withdraw our assent because we fail
to distinguish our higher Self from the lower through which he is preparing his self-revelation. As in the world, so
in ourselves, we cannot see God because of his workings and, especially, because he works in us through our
nature and not by a succession of arbitrary miracles. Man demands miracles that he may have faith; he wishes
to be dazzled in order that he may see. And this impatience, this ignorance may turn into a great danger and
disaster if, in our revolt against the divine leading, we call in another distorting Force more satisfying to our
impulses and desires and ask it to guide us and give it the Divine Name.
\par But while it is difficult for man to believe in something unseen within himself, it is easy for him to believe in
something which he can image as extraneous to himself. The spiritual progress of most human beings demands
an extraneous support, an object of faith outside us. It needs an external image of God; or it needs a human
representative,—Incarnation, Prophet or Guru; or it demands both and receives them. For according to the need
of the human soul the Divine manifests himself as deity, as human divine or in simple humanity—using that thick
disguise, which so successfully conceals the Godhead, for a means of transmission of his guidance.
Page 64

\par The Hindu discipline of spirituality provides for this need of the soul by the conceptions of the Ishta Devata,
the Avatar and the Guru. By the Ishta Devata, the chosen deity, is meant,—not some inferior Power, but a name
and form of the transcendent and universal Godhead. Almost all religions either have as their base or make use
of some such name and form of the Divine. Its necessity for the human soul is evident. God is the All and more
than the All. But that which is more than the All, how shall man conceive? And even the All is at first too hard
for him; for he himself in his active consciousness is a limited and selective formation and can open himself only
to that which is in harmony with his limited nature. There are things in the All which are too hard for his
comprehension or seem too terrible to his sensitive emotions and cowering sensations. Or, simply, he cannot
conceive as the Divine, cannot approach or cannot recognise something that is too much out of the circle of his
ignorant or partial conceptions. It is necessary for him to conceive God in his own image or in some form that is
beyond himself but consonant with his highest tendencies and seizable by his feelings or his intelligence.
Otherwise it would be difficult for him to come into contact and communion with the Divine.
\par Even then his nature calls for a human intermediary so that he may feel the Divine in something entirely
close to his own humanity and sensible in a human influence and example. This call is satisfied by the Divine
manifest in a human appearance, the Incarnation, the Avatar—Krishna, Christ, Buddha. Or if this is too hard for
him to conceive, the Divine represents himself through a less marvellous intermediary,—Prophet or Teacher. For
many who cannot conceive or are unwilling to accept the Divine Man, are ready to open themselves to the
supreme man, terming him not incarnation but world-teacher or divine representative.
\par This also is not enough; a living influence, a living example, a present instruction is needed. For it is only the
few who can make the past Teacher and his teaching, the past Incarnation and his example and influence a living
force in their lives. For this need
Page 65

also the Hindu discipline provides in the relation of the Guru and the disciple. The Guru may sometimes be the
Incarnation or World-Teacher; but it is sufficient that he should represent to the disciple the divine wisdom,
convey to him something of the divine ideal or make him feel the realised relation of the human soul with the
Eternal.
\par The sadhaka of the integral Yoga will make use of all these aids according to his nature; but it is necessary
that he should shun their limitations and cast from himself that exclusive tendency of egoistic mind which cries,
“My God, my Incarnation, my Prophet, my Guru,” and opposes it to all other realisation in a sectarian or a
fanatical spirit. All sectarianism, all fanaticism must be shunned; for it is inconsistent with the integrity of the
divine realisation.
\par On the contrary, the sadhaka of the integral Yoga will not be satisfied until he has included all other names
and forms of Deity in his own conception, seen his own Ishta Devata in all others, unified all Avatars in the unity
of Him who descends in the Avatar, welded the truth in all teachings into the harmony of the Eternal Wisdom.
\par Nor should he forget the aim of these external aids which is to awaken his soul to the Divine within him.
Nothing has been finally accomplished if that has not been accomplished. It is not sufficient to worship Krishna,
Christ or Buddha without, if there is not the revealing and the formation of the Buddha, the Christ or Krishna in
ourselves. And all other aids equally have no other purpose; each is a bridge between man's unconverted state
and the revelation of the Divine within him.
\par
\tstar
\par The Teacher of the integral Yoga will follow as far as he may the method of the Teacher within us. He will
lead the disciple through the nature of the disciple. Teaching, example, influence,—these are the three
instruments of the Guru. But the wise Teacher will not seek to impose himself or his opinions on the passive
acceptance of the receptive mind; he will throw in only
Page 66

what is productive and sure as a seed which will grow under the divine fostering within. He will seek to awaken
much more than to instruct; he will aim at the growth of the faculties and the experiences by a natural process
and free expansion. He will give a method as an aid, as a utilisable device, not as an imperative formula or a
fixed routine. And he will be on his guard against any turning of the means into a limitation, against the
mechanising of process. His whole business is to awaken the divine light and set working the divine force of
which he himself is only a means and an aid, a body or a channel.
\par The example is more powerful than the instruction; but it is not the example of the outward acts nor that of
the personal character which is of most importance. These have their place and their utility; but what will most
stimulate aspiration in others is the central fact of the divine realisation within him governing his whole life and
inner state and all his activities. This is the universal and essential element; the rest belongs to individual person
and circumstance. It is this dynamic realisation that the sadhaka must feel and reproduce in himself according to
his own nature; he need not strive after an imitation from outside which may well be sterilising rather than
productive of right and natural fruits.
\par Influence is more important than example. Influence is not the outward authority of the Teacher over his
disciple, but the power of his contact, of his presence, of the nearness of his soul to the soul of another, infusing
into it, even though in silence, that which he himself is and possesses. This is the supreme sign of the Master. For
the greatest Master is much less a Teacher than a Presence pouring the divine consciousness and its constituting
light and power and purity and bliss into all who are receptive around him.
\par And it shall also be a sign of the teacher of the integral Yoga that he does not arrogate to himself Guruhood
in a humanly vain and self-exalting spirit. His work, if he has one, is a trust from above, he himself a channel, a
vessel or a representative. He is a man helping his brothers, a child leading children, a Light kindling other lights,
an awakened Soul awakening souls,
Page 67

at highest a Power or Presence of the Divine calling to him other powers of the Divine.
\par
\tstar
\par The sadhaka who has all these aids is sure of his goal. Even a fall will be for him only a means of rising and
death a passage towards fulfilment. For once on this path, birth and death become only processes in the
development of his being and the stages of his journey.
\par Time is the remaining aid needed for the effectivity of the process. Time presents itself to human effort as
an enemy or a friend, as a resistance, a medium or an instrument. But always it is really the instrument of the
soul.
\par Time is a field of circumstances and forces meeting and working out a resultant progression whose course it
measures. To the ego it is a tyrant or a resistance, to the Divine an instrument. Therefore, while our effort is
personal, Time appears as a resistance, for it presents to us all the obstruction of the forces that conflict with our
own. When the divine working and the personal are combined in our consciousness, it appears as a medium and
a condition. When the two become one, it appears as a servant and instrument.
\par The ideal attitude of the sadhaka towards Time is to have an endless patience as if he had all eternity for his
fulfilment and yet to develop the energy that shall realise now and with an ever-increasing mastery and pressure
of rapidity till it reaches the miraculous instantaneousness of the supreme divine Transformation.
Page 68

\par
\hn Chapter II
\par
\ht Self-Consecration
\par\drop All Yoga is in its nature a new birth; it is a birth out of the ordinary, the mentalised material life of man
into a higher spiritual consciousness and a greater and diviner being. No Yoga can be successfully undertaken
and followed unless there is a strong awakening to the necessity of that larger spiritual existence. The soul that is
called to this deep and vast inward change, may arrive in different ways to the initial departure. It may come to it
by its own natural development which has been leading it unconsciously towards the awakening; it may reach it
through the influence of a religion or the attraction of a philosophy; it may approach it by a slow illumination or
leap to it by a sudden touch or shock; it may be pushed or led to it by the pressure of outward circumstances or
by an inward necessity, by a single word that breaks the seals of the mind or by long reflection, by the distant
example of one who has trod the path or by contact and daily influence. According to the nature and the
circumstances the call will come.
\par But in whatever way it comes, there must be a decision of the mind and the will and, as its result, a complete
and effective self-consecration. The acceptance of a new spiritual idea-force and upward orientation in the
being, an illumination, a turning or conversion seized on by the will and the heart's aspiration,—this is the
momentous act which contains as in a seed all the results that the Yoga has to give. The mere idea or intellectual
seeking of something higher beyond, however strongly grasped by the mind's interest, is ineffective unless it is
seized on by the heart as the one thing desirable and by the will as the one thing to be done. For truth of the Spirit
has not to be merely thought but to be lived, and to live it demands a unified single-mindedness of the being; so
great a change as is contemplated by the Yoga is not to be effected by a divided will or by a small portion of the
Page 69

energy or by a hesitating mind. He who seeks the Divine must consecrate himself to God and to God only.
\par If the change comes suddenly and decisively by an overpowering influence, there is no further essential or
lasting difficulty. The choice follows upon the thought, or is simultaneous with it, and the self-consecration
follows upon the choice. The feet are already set upon the path, even if they seem at first to wander uncertainly
and even though the path itself may be only obscurely seen and the knowledge of the goal may be imperfect.
The secret Teacher, the inner Guide is already at work, though he may not yet manifest himself or may not yet
appear in the person of his human representative. Whatever difficulties and hesitations may ensue, they cannot
eventually prevail against the power of the experience that has turned the current of the life. The call, once
decisive, stands; the thing that has been born cannot eventually be stifled. Even if the force of circumstances
prevents a regular pursuit or a full practical self-consecration from the first, still the mind has taken its bent and
persists and returns with an ever-increasing effect upon its leading preoccupation. There is an ineluctable
persistence of the inner being, and against it circumstances are in the end powerless, and no weakness in the
nature can for long be an obstacle.
\par But this is not always the manner of the commencement. The sadhaka is often led gradually and there is a
long space between the first turning of the mind and the full assent of the nature to the thing towards which it
turns. There may at first be only a vivid intellectual interest, a forcible attraction towards the idea and some
imperfect form of practice. Or perhaps there is an effort not favoured by the whole nature, a decision or a turn
imposed by an intellectual influence or dictated by personal affection and admiration for someone who is himself
consecrated and devoted to the Highest. In such cases, a long period of preparation may be necessary before
there comes the irrevocable consecration; and in some instances it may not come. There may be some advance,
there may be a strong effort, even much purification and many experiences other than those that are central or
supreme; but the life will either be spent in
Page 70

\NH preparation or, a certain stage having been reached, the mind pushed by an insufficient driving-force may
rest content at the limit of the effort possible to it. Or there may even be a recoil to the lower life,—what is
called in the ordinary parlance of Yoga a fall from the path. This lapse happens because there is a defect at the
very centre. The intellect has been interested, the heart attracted, the will has strung itself to the effort, but the
whole nature has not been taken captive by the Divine. It has only acquiesced in the interest, the attraction or the
endeavour. There has been an experiment, perhaps even an eager experiment, but not a total self-giving to an
imperative need of the soul or to an unforsakable ideal. Even such imperfect Yoga has not been wasted; for no
upward effort is made in vain. Even if it fails in the present or arrives only at some preparatory stage or
preliminary realisation, it has yet determined the soul's future.
\par But if we desire to make the most of the opportunity that this life gives us, if we wish to respond adequately
to the call we have received and to attain to the goal we have glimpsed, not merely advance a little towards it, it
is essential that there should be an entire self-giving. The secret of success in Yoga is to regard it not as one of
the aims to be pursued in life, but as the one and only aim, not as an important part of life, but as the whole of
life.
\par
\tstar
\par And since Yoga is in its essence a turning away from the ordinary material and animal life led by most men
or from the more mental but still limited way of living followed by the few to a greater spiritual life, to the way
divine, every part of our energies that is given to the lower existence in the spirit of that existence is a
contradiction of our aim and our self-dedication. On the other hand, every energy or activity that we can convert
from its allegiance to the lower and dedicate to the service of the higher is so much gained on our road, so much
taken from the powers that oppose our progress. It is the difficulty of this wholesale conversion that is the source
of all the stumblings in
Page 71

the path of Yoga. For our entire nature and its environment, all our personal and all our universal self, are full of
habits and of influences that are opposed to our spiritual rebirth and work against the whole-heartedness of our
endeavour. In a certain sense we are nothing but a complex mass of mental, nervous and physical habits held
together by a few ruling ideas, desires and associations,—an amalgam of many small self-repeating forces with a
few major vibrations. What we propose in our Yoga is nothing less than to break up the whole formation of our
past and present which makes up the ordinary material and mental man and to create a new centre of vision and
a new universe of activities in ourselves which shall constitute a divine humanity or a superhuman nature.
\par The first necessity is to dissolve that central faith and vision in the mind which concentrate it on its
development and satisfaction and interests in the old externalised order of things. It is imperative to exchange this
surface orientation for the deeper faith and vision which see only the Divine and seek only after the Divine. The
next need is to compel all our lower being to pay homage to this new faith and greater vision. All our nature must
make an integral surrender; it must offer itself in every part and every movement to that which seems to the
unregenerated sense-mind so much less real than the material world and its objects. Our whole being—soul,
mind, sense, heart, will, life, body—must consecrate all its energies so entirely and in such a way that it shall
become a fit vehicle for the Divine. This is no easy task; for everything in the world follows the fixed habit which
is to it a law and resists a radical change. And no change can be more radical than the revolution attempted in
the integral Yoga. Everything in us has constantly to be called back to the central faith and will and vision. Every
thought and impulse has to be reminded in the language of the Upanishad that “That is the divine Brahman and
not this which men here adore.” Every vital fibre has to be persuaded to accept an entire renunciation of all that
hitherto represented to it its own existence. Mind has to cease to be mind and become brilliant with something
beyond it. Life has to change into a thing vast and calm and intense and
Page 72

powerful that can no longer recognise its old blind eager narrow self of petty impulse and desire. Even the body
has to submit to a mutation and be no longer the clamorous animal or the impeding clod it now is, but become
instead a conscious servant and radiant instrument and living form of the spirit.
\par The difficulty of the task has led naturally to the pursuit of easy and trenchant solutions; it has generated and
fixed deeply the tendency of religions and of schools of Yoga to separate the life of the world from the inner life.
The powers of this world and their actual activities, it is felt, either do not belong to God at all or are for some
obscure and puzzling cause, Maya or another, a dark contradiction of the divine Truth. And on their own opposite
side the powers of the Truth and their ideal activities are seen to belong to quite another plane of consciousness
than that, obscure, ignorant and perverse in its impulses and forces, on which the life of the earth is founded.
There appears at once the antinomy of a bright and pure kingdom of God and a dark and impure kingdom of the
devil; we feel the opposition of our crawling earthly birth and life to an exalted spiritual God-consciousness; we
become readily convinced of the incompatibility of life's subjection to Maya with the soul's concentration in pure
Brahman existence. The easiest way is to turn away from all that belongs to the one and to retreat by a naked
and precipitous ascent into the other. Thus arises the attraction and, it would seem, the necessity of the principle
of exclusive concentration which plays so prominent a part in the specialised schools of Yoga; for by that
concentration we can arrive through an uncompromising renunciation of the world at an entire self-consecration
to the One on whom we concentrate. It is no longer incumbent on us to compel all the lower activities to the
difficult recognition of a new and higher spiritualised life and train them to be its agents or executive powers. It is
enough to kill or quiet them and keep at most the few energies necessary, on one side, for the maintenance of the
body and, on the other, for communion with the Divine.
\par The very aim and conception of an integral Yoga debar us from adopting this simple and strenuous
high-pitched process.
Page 73

The hope of an integral transformation forbids us to take a short cut or to make ourselves light for the race by
throwing away our impedimenta. For we have set out to conquer all ourselves and the world for God; we are
determined to give him our becoming as well as our being and not merely to bring the pure and naked spirit as a
bare offering to a remote and secret Divinity in a distant heaven or abolish all we are in a holocaust to an
immobile Absolute. The Divine that we adore is not only a remote extra-cosmic Reality, but a half-veiled
Manifestation present and near to us here in the universe. Life is the field of a divine manifestation not yet
complete: here, in life, on earth, in the body,—\s{ihaiva}, as the Upanishads insist,—we have to unveil the
Godhead; here we must make its transcendent greatness, light and sweetness real to our consciousness, here
possess and, as far as may be, express it. Life then we must accept in our Yoga in order utterly to transmute it;
we are forbidden to shrink from the difficulties that this acceptance may add to our struggle. Our compensation
is that even if the path is more rugged, the effort more complex and bafflingly arduous, yet after a certain point
we gain an immense advantage. For once our minds are reasonably fixed in the central vision and our wills are
on the whole converted to the single pursuit, Life becomes our helper. Intent, vigilant, integrally conscious, we
can take every detail of its forms and every incident of its movements as food for the sacrificial Fire within us.
Victorious in the struggle, we can compel Earth herself to be an aid towards our perfection and can enrich our
realisation with the booty torn from the Powers that oppose us.
\par
\tstar
\par There is another direction in which the ordinary practice of Yoga arrives at a helpful but narrowing
simplification which is denied to the sadhaka of the integral aim. The practice of Yoga brings us face to face
with the extraordinary complexity of our own being, the stimulating but also embarrassing multiplicity of our
personality, the rich endless confusion of Nature. To the ordinary man
Page 74

who lives upon his own waking surface, ignorant of the self's depths and vastnesses behind the veil, his
psychological existence is fairly simple. A small but clamorous company of desires, some imperative intellectual
and aesthetic cravings, some tastes, a few ruling or prominent ideas amid a great current of unconnected or
ill-connected and mostly trivial thoughts, a number of more or less imperative vital needs, alternations of physical
health and disease, a scattered and inconsequent succession of joys and griefs, frequent minor disturbances and
vicissitudes and rarer strong searchings and upheavals of mind or body, and through it all Nature, partly with the
aid of his thought and will, partly without or in spite of it, arranging these things in some rough practical fashion,
some tolerable disorderly order,—this is the material of his existence. The average human being even now is in
his inward existence as crude and undeveloped as was the bygone primitive man in his outward life. But as soon
as we go deep within ourselves,—and Yoga means a plunge into all the multiple profundities of the soul,—we
find ourselves subjectively, as man in his growth has found himself objectively, surrounded by a whole complex
world which we have to know and to conquer.
\par The most disconcerting discovery is to find that every part of us—intellect, will, sense-mind, nervous or
desire self, the heart, the body—has each, as it were, its own complex individuality and natural formation
independent of the rest; it neither agrees with itself nor with the others nor with the representative ego which is
the shadow cast by some central and centralising self on our superficial ignorance. We find that we are
composed not of one but many personalities and each has its own demands and differing nature. Our being is a
roughly constituted chaos into which we have to introduce the principle of a divine order. Moreover, we find that
inwardly too, no less than outwardly, we are not alone in the world; the sharp separateness of our ego was no
more than a strong imposition and delusion; we do not exist in ourselves, we do not really live apart in an inner
privacy or solitude. Our mind is a receiving, developing and modifying machine into which there is being
constantly passed from
Page 75

\NH moment to moment a ceaseless foreign flux, a streaming mass of disparate materials from above, from
below, from outside. Much more than half our thoughts and feelings are not our own in the sense that they take
form out of ourselves; of hardly anything can it be said that it is truly original to our nature. A large part comes to
us from others or from the environment, whether as raw material or as manufactured imports; but still more
largely they come from universal Nature here or from other worlds and planes and their beings and powers and
influences; for we are overtopped and environed by other planes of consciousness, mind planes, life planes,
subtle matter planes, from which our life and action here are fed, or fed on, pressed, dominated, made use of for
the manifestation of their forms and forces. The difficulty of our separate salvation is immensely increased by
this complexity and manifold openness and subjection to the in-streaming energies of the universe. Of all this we
have to take account, to deal with it, to know what is the secret stuff of our nature and its constituent and
resultant motions and to create in it all a divine centre and a true harmony and luminous order.
\par In the ordinary paths of Yoga the method used for dealing with these conflicting materials is direct and
simple. One or another of the principal psychological forces in us is selected as our single means for attaining to
the Divine; the rest is quieted into inertia or left to starve in its smallness. The Bhakta, seizing on the emotional
forces of the being, the intense activities of the heart, abides concentrated in the love of God, gathered up as into
a single one-pointed tongue of fire; he is indifferent to the activities of thought, throws behind him the
importunities of the reason, cares nothing for the mind's thirst for knowledge. All the knowledge he needs is his
faith and the inspirations that well up from a heart in communion with the Divine. He has no use for any will to
works that is not turned to the direct worship of the Beloved or the service of the temple. The man of
Knowledge, self-confined by a deliberate choice to the force and activities of discriminative thought, finds release
in the mind's hushed inward-drawn endeavour. He concentrates on the idea of the self, succeeds by a subtle
inner discernment
Page 76

in \NH distinguishing its silent presence amid the veiling activities of Nature, and through the perceptive idea
arrives at the concrete spiritual experience. He is indifferent to the play of the emotions, deaf to the hunger-call
of passion, closed to the activities of Life,—the more blessed he, the sooner they fall away from him and leave
him free, still and mute, the eternal non-doer. The body is his stumbling-block, the vital functions are his enemies;
if their demands can be reduced to a minimum, that is his great good fortune. The endless difficulties that arise
from the environing world are dismissed by erecting firmly against them a defence of outer physical and inner
spiritual solitude; safe behind a wall of inner silence, he remains impassive and untouched by the world and by
others. To be alone with oneself or alone with the Divine, to walk apart with God and his devotees, to entrench
oneself in the single self-ward endeavour of the mind or Godward passion of the heart is the trend of these
Yogas. The problem is solved by the excision of all but the one central difficulty which pursues the one chosen
motive-force; into the midst of the dividing calls of our nature the principle of an exclusive concentration comes
sovereignly to our rescue.
\par But for the sadhaka of the integral Yoga this inner or this outer solitude can only be incidents or periods in
his spiritual progress. Accepting life, he has to bear not only his own burden, but a great part of the world's
burden too along with it, as a continuation of his own sufficiently heavy load. Therefore his Yoga has much more
of the nature of a battle than others; but this is not only an individual battle, it is a collective war waged over a
considerable country. He has not only to conquer in himself the forces of egoistic falsehood and disorder, but to
conquer them as representatives of the same adverse and inexhaustible forces in the world. Their representative
character gives them a much more obstinate capacity of resistance, an almost endless right to recurrence. Often
he finds that even after he has won persistently his own personal battle, he has still to win it over and over again
in a seemingly interminable war, because his inner existence has already been so much enlarged that not only it
contains his own being with its well-defined needs and experiences, but is in
Page 77

solidarity with the being of others, because in himself he contains the universe.
\par Nor is the seeker of the integral fulfilment permitted to solve too arbitrarily even the conflict of his own inner
members. He has to harmonise deliberate knowledge with unquestioning faith; he must conciliate the gentle soul
of love with the formidable need of power; the passivity of the soul that lives content in transcendent calm has to
be fused with the activity of the divine helper and the divine warrior. To him as to all seekers of the spirit there
are offered for solution the oppositions of the reason, the clinging hold of the senses, the perturbations of the
heart, the ambush of the desires, the clog of the physical body; but he has to deal in another fashion with their
mutual and internal conflicts and their hindrance to his aim, for he must arrive at an infinitely more difficult
perfection in the handling of all this rebel matter. Accepting them as instruments for the divine realisation and
manifestation, he has to convert their jangling discords, to enlighten their thick darknesses, to transfigure them
separately and all together, harmonising them in themselves and with each other,—integrally, omitting no grain or
strand or vibration, leaving no iota of imperfection anywhere. An exclusive concentration, or even a succession
of concentrations of that kind, can be in his complex work only a temporary convenience; it has to be abandoned
as soon as its utility is over. An all-inclusive concentration is the difficult achievement towards which he must
labour.
\par
\tstar
\par Concentration is indeed the first condition of any Yoga, but it is an all-receiving concentration that is the very
nature of the integral Yoga. A separate strong fixing of the thought, of the emotions or of the will on a single
idea, object, state, inner movement or principle is no doubt a frequent need here also; but this is only a subsidiary
helpful process. A wide massive opening, a harmonised concentration of the whole being in all its parts and
through all its powers upon the One who is the All
Page 78

is the larger action of this Yoga without which it cannot achieve its purpose. For it is the consciousness that rests
in the One and that acts in the All to which we aspire; it is this that we seek to impose on every element of our
being and on every movement of our nature. This wide and concentrated totality is the essential character of the
Sadhana and its character must determine its practice.
\par But even though the concentration of all the being on the Divine is the character of the Yoga, yet is our
being too complex a thing to be taken up easily and at once, as if we were taking up the world in a pair of hands,
and set in its entirety to a single task. Man in his effort at self-transcendence has usually to seize on some one
spring or some powerful leverage in the complicated machine that his nature is; this spring or lever he touches in
preference to others and uses it to set the machine in motion towards the end that he has in view. In his choice it
is always Nature itself that should be his guide. But here it must be Nature at her highest and widest in him, not
at her lowest or in some limiting movement. In her lower vital activities it is desire that Nature takes as her most
powerful leverage; but the distinct character of man is that he is a mental being, not a merely vital creature. As
he can use his thinking mind and will to restrain and correct his life impulses, so too he can bring in the action of
a still higher luminous mentality aided by the deeper soul in him, the psychic being, and supersede by these
greater and purer motive-powers the domination of the vital and sensational force that we call desire. He can
entirely master or persuade it and offer it up for transformation to its divine Master. This higher mentality and
this deeper soul, the psychic element in man, are the two grappling hooks by which the Divine can lay hold upon
his nature.
\par The higher mind in man is something other, loftier, purer, vaster, more powerful than the reason or logical
intelligence. The animal is a vital and sensational being; man, it is said, is distinguished from the animal by the
possession of reason. But that is a very summary, a very imperfect and misleading account of the matter. For
reason is only a particular and limited
Page 79

\NH utilitarian and instrumental activity that proceeds from something much greater than itself, from a power
that dwells in an ether more luminous, wider, illimitable. The true and ultimate, as distinguished from the
immediate or intermediate importance of our observing, reasoning, inquiring, judging intelligence is that it prepares
the human being for the right reception and right action of a Light from above which must progressively replace
in him the obscure light from below that guides the animal. The latter also has a rudimentary reason, a kind of
thought, a soul, a will and keen emotions; even though less developed, its psychology is yet the same in kind as
man's. But all these capacities in the animal are automatically moved and strictly limited, almost even constituted
by the lower nervous being. All animal perceptions, sensibilities, activities are ruled by nervous and vital instincts,
cravings, needs, satisfactions, of which the nexus is the life-impulse and vital desire. Man too is bound, but less
bound, to this automatism of the vital nature. Man can bring an enlightened will, an enlightened thought and
enlightened emotions to the difficult work of his self-development; he can more and more subject to these more
conscious and reflecting guides the inferior function of desire. In proportion as he can thus master and enlighten
his lower self, he is man and no longer an animal. When he can begin to replace desire altogether by a still
greater enlightened thought and sight and will in touch with the Infinite, consciously subject to a diviner will than
his own, linked to a more universal and transcendent knowledge, he has commenced the ascent towards the
superman; he is on his upward march towards the Divine.
\par It is, then, in the highest mind of thought and light and will or it is in the inner heart of deepest feeling and
emotion that we must first centre our consciousness,—in either of them or, if we are capable, in both
together,—and use that as our leverage to lift the nature wholly towards the Divine. The concentration of an
enlightened thought, will and heart turned in unison towards one vast goal of our knowledge, one luminous and
infinite source of our action, one imperishable object of our emotion is the starting-point of the Yoga. And the
object of our seeking must be
Page 80

the very fount of the Light which is growing in us, the very origin of the Force which we are calling to move our
members. Our one objective must be the Divine himself to whom, knowingly or unknowingly, something always
aspires in our secret nature. There must be a large, many-sided yet single concentration of the thought on the
idea, the perception, the vision, the awakening touch, the soul's realisation of the one Divine. There must be a
flaming concentration of the heart on the seeking of the All and Eternal and, when once we have found him, a
deep plunging and immersion in the possession and ecstasy of the All-Beautiful. There must be a strong and
immovable concentration of the will on the attainment and fulfilment of all that the Divine is and a free and
plastic opening of it to all that he intends to manifest in us. This is the triple way of the Yoga.
\par
\tstar
\par But on that which as yet we know not how shall we concentrate? And yet we cannot know the Divine
unless we have achieved this concentration of our being upon him. A concentration which culminates in a living
realisation and the constant sense of the presence of the One in ourselves and in all of which we are aware, is
what we mean in Yoga by knowledge and the effort after knowledge. It is not enough to devote ourselves by the
reading of Scriptures or by the stress of philosophic reasoning to an intellectual understanding of the Divine; for
at the end of our long mental labour we might know all that has been said of the Eternal, possess all that can be
thought about the Infinite and yet we might not know him at all. This intellectual preparation can indeed be the
first stage in a powerful Yoga, but it is not indispensable: it is not a step which all need or can be called upon to
take. Yoga would be impossible, except for a very few, if the intellectual figure of knowledge arrived at by the
speculative or meditative Reason were its indispensable condition or a binding preliminary. All that the Light from
above asks of us that it may begin its work is a call from the soul and a sufficient point of support in the mind.
This support can be reached through an
Page 81

insistent idea of the Divine in the thought, a corresponding will in the dynamic parts, an aspiration, a faith, a need
in the heart. Any one of these may lead or predominate, if all cannot move in unison or in an equal rhythm. The
idea may be and must in the beginning be inadequate; the aspiration may be narrow and imperfect, the faith
poorly illumined or even, as not surely founded on the rock of knowledge, fluctuating, uncertain, easily diminished;
often even it may be extinguished and need to be lit again with difficulty like a torch in a windy pass. But if once
there is a resolute self-consecration from deep within, if there is an awakening to the soul's call, these inadequate
things can be a sufficient instrument for the divine purpose. Therefore the wise have always been unwilling to
limit man's avenues towards God; they would not shut against his entry even the narrowest portal, the lowest and
darkest postern, the humblest wicket-gate. Any name, any form, any symbol, any offering has been held to be
sufficient if there is the consecration along with it; for the Divine knows himself in the heart of the seeker and
accepts the sacrifice.
\par But still the greater and wider the moving idea-force behind the consecration, the better for the seeker; his
attainment is likely to be fuller and more ample. If we are to attempt an integral Yoga, it will be as well to start
with an idea of the Divine that is itself integral. There should be an aspiration in the heart wide enough for a
realisation without any narrow limits. Not only should we avoid a sectarian religious outlook, but also all one-sided
philosophical conceptions which try to shut up the Ineffable in a restricting mental formula. The dynamic
conception or impelling sense with which our Yoga can best set out would be naturally the idea, the sense of a
conscious all-embracing but all-exceeding Infinite. Our uplook must be to a free, all-powerful, perfect and blissful
One and Oneness in which all beings move and live and through which all can meet and become one. This
Eternal will be at once personal and impersonal in his self-revelation and touch upon the soul. He is personal
because he is the conscious Divine, the infinite Person who casts some broken reflection of himself in the myriad
divine and undivine personalities of the universe. He is impersonal because he appears to us
Page 82

as an infinite Existence, Consciousness and Ananda and because he is the fount, base and constituent of all
existences and all energies, the very material of our being and mind and life and body, our spirit and our matter.
The thought, concentrating on him, must not merely understand in an intellectual form that he exists, or conceive
of him as an abstraction, a logical necessity; it must become a seeing thought able to meet him here as the
Inhabitant in all, realise him in ourselves, watch and take hold on the movement of his forces. He is the one
Existence: he is the original and universal Delight that constitutes all things and exceeds them: he is the one
infinite Consciousness that composes all consciousnesses and informs all their movements: he is the one
illimitable Being who sustains all action and experience: his will guides the evolution of things towards their yet
unrealised but inevitable aim and plenitude. To him the heart can consecrate itself, approach him as the supreme
Beloved, beat and move in him as in a universal sweetness of Love and a living sea of Delight. For his is the
secret Joy that supports the soul in all its experiences and maintains even the errant ego in its ordeals and
struggles till all sorrow and suffering shall cease. His is the Love and the Bliss of the infinite divine Lover who is
drawing all things by their own path towards his happy oneness. On him the Will can unalterably fix as the
invisible Power that guides and fulfils it and as the source of its strength. In the impersonality this actuating
Power is a self-illumined Force that contains all results and calmly works until it accomplishes, in the personality
an all-wise and omnipotent Master of the Yoga whom nothing can prevent from leading it to its goal. This is the
faith with which the seeker has to begin his seeking and endeavour; for in all his effort here, but most of all in his
effort towards the Unseen, mental man must perforce proceed by faith. When the realisation comes, the faith
divinely fulfilled and completed will be transformed into an eternal flame of knowledge.
\par
\tstar
\par Into all our endeavour upward the lower element of desire will
Page 83

at first naturally enter. For what the enlightened will sees as the thing to be done and pursues as the crown to be
conquered, what the heart embraces as the one thing delightful, that in us which feels itself limited and opposed
and, because it is limited, craves and struggles, will seek with the troubled passion of an egoistic desire. This
craving life-force or desire-soul in us has to be accepted at first, but only in order that it may be transformed.
Even from the very beginning it has to be taught to renounce all other desires and concentrate itself on the
passion for the Divine. This capital point gained, it has to be taught to desire, not for its own separate sake, but
for God in the world and for the Divine in ourselves; it has to fix itself upon no personal spiritual gain, though of
all possible spiritual gains we are sure, but on the great work to be done in us and others, on the high coming
manifestation which is to be the glorious fulfilment of the Divine in the world, on the Truth that has to be sought
and lived and enthroned for ever. But last, most difficult for it, more difficult than to seek with the right object, it
has to be taught to seek in the right manner; for it must learn to desire, not in its own egoistic way, but in the way
of the Divine. It must insist no longer, as the strong separative will always insists, on its own manner of
fulfilment, its own dream of possession, its own idea of the right and the desirable; it must yearn to fulfil a larger
and greater Will and consent to wait upon a less interested and ignorant guidance. Thus trained, Desire, that
great unquiet harasser and troubler of man and cause of every kind of stumbling, will become fit to be
transformed into its divine counterpart. For desire and passion too have their divine forms; there is a pure ecstasy
of the soul's seeking beyond all craving and grief, there is a Will of Ananda that sits glorified in the possession of
the supreme beatitudes.
\par When once the object of concentration has possessed and is possessed by the three master instruments, the
thought, the heart and the will,—a consummation fully possible only when the desire-soul in us has submitted to
the Divine Law,—the perfection of mind and life and body can be effectively fulfilled in our transmuted nature.
This will be done, not for the personal satisfaction of the ego, but that the whole may constitute a fit
Page 84

temple for the Divine Presence, a faultless instrument for the divine work. For that work can be truly performed
only when the instrument, consecrated and perfected, has grown fit for a selfless action,—and that will be when
personal desire and egoism are abolished, but not the liberated individual. Even when the little ego has been
abolished, the true spiritual Person can still remain and God's will and work and delight in him and the spiritual
use of his perfection and fulfilment. Our works will then be divine and done divinely; our mind and life and will,
devoted to the Divine, will be used to help fulfil in others and in the world that which has been first realised in
ourselves,—all that we can manifest of the embodied Unity, Love, Freedom, Strength, Power, Splendour,
immortal Joy which is the goal of the Spirit's terrestrial adventure.
\par The Yoga must start with an effort or at least a settled turn towards this total concentration. A constant and
unfailing will of consecration of all ourselves to the Supreme is demanded of us, an offering of our whole being
and our many-chambered nature to the Eternal who is the All. The effective fullness of our concentration on the
one thing needful to the exclusion of all else will be the measure of our self-consecration to the One who is alone
desirable. But this exclusiveness will in the end exclude nothing except the falsehood of our way of seeing the
world and our will's ignorance. For our concentration on the Eternal will be consummated by the mind when we
see constantly the Divine in itself and the Divine in ourselves, but also the Divine in all things and beings and
happenings. It will be consummated by the heart when all emotion is summed up in the love of the Divine,—of
the Divine in itself and for itself, but love too of the Divine in all its beings and powers and personalities and
forms in the Universe. It will be consummated by the will when we feel and receive always the divine impulsion
and accept that alone as our sole motive force; but this will mean that, having slain to the last rebellious straggler
the wandering impulses of the egoistic nature, we have universalised ourselves and can accept with a constant
happy acceptance the one divine working in all things. This is the first fundamental siddhi of the integral Yoga.
Page 85

\par It is nothing less that is meant in the end when we speak of the absolute consecration of the individual to the
Divine. But this total fullness of consecration can only come by a constant progression when the long and
difficult process of transforming desire out of existence is completed in an ungrudging measure. Perfect
self-consecration implies perfect self-surrender.
\par
\tstar
\par For here, there are two movements with a transitional stage between them, two periods of this Yoga,—one
of the process of surrender, the other of its crown and consequence. In the first the individual prepares himself
for the reception of the Divine into his members. For all this first period he has to work by means of the
instruments of the lower Nature, but aided more and more from above. But in the later transitional stage of this
movement our personal and necessarily ignorant effort more and more dwindles and a higher Nature acts; the
eternal Shakti descends into this limited form of mortality and progressively possesses and transmutes it. In the
second period the greater movement wholly replaces the lesser, formerly indispensable first action; but this can
be done only when our self-surrender is complete. The ego person in us cannot transform itself by its own force
or will or knowledge or by any virtue of its own into the nature of the Divine; all it can do is to fit itself for the
transformation and make more and more its surrender to that which it seeks to become. As long as the ego is at
work in us, our personal action is and must always be in its nature a part of the lower grades of existence; it is
obscure or half-enlightened, limited in its field, very partially effective in its power. If a spiritual transformation,
not a mere illumining modification of our nature, is to be done at all, we must call in the Divine Shakti to effect
that miraculous work in the individual; for she alone has the needed force, decisive, all-wise and illimitable. But
the entire substitution of the divine for the human personal action is not at once entirely possible. All interference
from below that would falsify the truth of the superior action must first be inhibited or rendered impotent,
Page 86

and it must be done by our own free choice. A continual and always repeated refusal of the impulsions and
falsehoods of the lower nature is asked from us and an insistent support to the Truth as it grows in our parts; for
the progressive settling into our nature and final perfection of the incoming informing Light, Purity and Power
needs for its development and sustenance our free acceptance of it and our stubborn rejection of all that is
contrary to it, inferior or incompatible.
\par In the first movement of self-preparation, the period of personal effort, the method we have to use is this
concentration of the whole being on the Divine that it seeks and, as its corollary, this constant rejection, throwing
out, {\it katharsis}, of all that is not the true Truth of the Divine. An entire consecration of all that we are, think,
feel and do will be the result of this persistence. This consecration in its turn must culminate in an integral
self-giving to the Highest; for its crown and sign of completion is the whole nature's all-comprehending absolute
surrender. In the second stage of the Yoga, transitional between the human and the divine working, there will
supervene an increasing purified and vigilant passivity, a more and more luminous divine response to the Divine
Force, but not to any other; and there will be as a result the growing inrush of a great and conscious miraculous
working from above. In the last period there is no effort at all, no set method, no fixed sadhana; the place of
endeavour and tapasya will be taken by a natural, simple, powerful and happy disclosing of the flower of the
Divine out of the bud of a purified and perfected terrestrial nature. These are the natural successions of the
action of the Yoga.
\par These movements are indeed not always or absolutely arranged in a strict succession to each other. The
second stage begins in part before the first is completed; the first continues in part until the second is perfected;
the last divine working can manifest from time to time as a promise before it is finally settled and normal to the
nature. Always too there is something higher and greater than the individual which leads him even in his personal
labour and endeavour. Often he may become, and remain for a time, wholly conscious, even in parts of his being
Page 87

permanently conscious, of this greater leading behind the veil, and that may happen long before his whole nature
has been purified in all its parts from the lower indirect control. Even, he may be thus conscious from the
beginning; his mind and heart, if not his other members, may respond to that seizing and penetrating guidance
with a certain initial completeness from the very first steps of the Yoga. But it is the constant and complete and
uniform action of the great direct control that more and more distinguishes the transitional stage as it proceeds
and draws to its close. This predominance of a greater diviner leading, not personal to ourselves, indicates the
nature's increasing ripeness for a total spiritual transformation. It is the unmistakable sign that the
self-consecration has not only been accepted in principle but is fulfilled in act and power. The Supreme has laid
his luminous hand upon a chosen human vessel of his miraculous Light and Power and Ananda.
Page 88

\par
\hn Chapter III
\par
\ht Self-Surrender in Works—\nl The Way of the Gita
\par\drop Life, not a remote silent or high-uplifted ecstatic Beyond-Life alone, is the field of our Yoga. The
transformation of our superficial, narrow and fragmentary human way of thinking, seeing, feeling and being into a
deep and wide spiritual consciousness and an integrated inner and outer existence and of our ordinary human
living into the divine way of life must be its central purpose. The means towards this supreme end is a self-giving
of all our nature to the Divine. Everything must be given to the Divine within us, to the universal All and to the
transcendent Supreme. An absolute concentration of our will, our heart and our thought on that one and manifold
Divine, an unreserved self-consecration of our whole being to the Divine alone—this is the decisive movement,
the turning of the ego to That which is infinitely greater than itself, its self-giving and indispensable surrender.
\par The life of the human creature, as it is ordinarily lived, is composed of a half-fixed, half-fluid mass of very
imperfectly ruled thoughts, perceptions, sensations, emotions, desires, enjoyments, acts, mostly customary and
self-repeating, in part only dynamic and self-developing, but all centred around a superficial ego. The sum of
movement of these activities eventuates in an internal growth which is partly visible and operative in this life,
partly a seed of progress in lives hereafter. This growth of the conscious being, an expansion, an increasing
self-expression, a more and more harmonised development of his constituent members is the whole meaning and
all the pith of human existence. It is for this meaningful development of consciousness by thought, will, emotion,
desire, action and experience, leading in the end to a supreme divine self-discovery, that Man, the
Page 89

mental being, has entered into the material body. All the rest is either auxiliary and subordinate or accidental and
otiose; that only matters which sustains and helps the evolution of his nature and the growth or rather the
progressive unfolding and discovery of his self and spirit.
\par The aim set before our Yoga is nothing less than to hasten this supreme object of our existence here. Its
process leaves behind the ordinary tardy method of slow and confused growth through the evolution of Nature.
For the natural evolution is at its best an uncertain growth under cover, partly by the pressure of the environment,
partly by a groping education and an ill-lighted purposeful effort, an only partially illumined and half-automatic use
of opportunities with many blunders and lapses and relapses; a great portion of it is made up of apparent
accidents and circumstances and vicissitudes,—though veiling a secret divine intervention and guidance. In Yoga
we replace this confused crooked crab-motion by a rapid, conscious and self-directed evolution which is planned
to carry us, as far as can be, in a straight line towards the goal set before us. In a certain sense it may be an
error to speak of a goal anywhere in a progression which may well be infinite. Still we can conceive of an
immediate goal, an ulterior objective beyond our present achievement towards which the soul in man can aspire.
There lies before him the possibility of a new birth; there can be an ascent into a higher and wider plane of being
and its descent to transform his members. An enlarged and illumined consciousness is possible that shall make of
him a liberated spirit and a perfected force—and, if spread beyond the individual, it might even constitute a divine
humanity or else a new, a supramental and therefore a superhuman race. It is this new birth that we make our
aim: a growth into a divine consciousness is the whole meaning of our Yoga, an integral conversion to divinity not
only of the soul but of all the parts of our nature.
\par
\tstar
\par Our purpose in Yoga is to exile the limited outward-looking
Page 90

ego and to enthrone God in its place as the ruling Inhabitant of the nature. And this means, first, to disinherit
desire and no longer accept the enjoyment of desire as the ruling human motive. The spiritual life will draw its
sustenance not from desire but from a pure and selfless spiritual delight of essential existence. And not only the
vital nature in us whose stamp is desire, but the mental being too must undergo a new birth and a transfiguring
change. Our divided, egoistic, limited and ignorant thought and intelligence must disappear; in its place there must
stream in the catholic and faultless play of a shadowless divine illumination which shall culminate in the end in a
natural self-existent Truth-consciousness free from groping half-truth and stumbling error. Our confused and
embarrassed ego-centred small-motived will and action must cease and make room for the total working of a
swiftly powerful, lucidly automatic, divinely moved and guided unfallen Force. There must be implanted and
activised in all our doings a supreme, impersonal, unfaltering and unstumbling will in spontaneous and untroubled
unison with the will of the Divine. The unsatisfying surface play of our feeble egoistic emotions must be ousted
and there must be revealed instead a secret deep and vast psychic heart within that waits behind them for its
hour; all our feelings, impelled by this inner heart in which dwells the Divine, will be transmuted into calm and
intense movements of a twin passion of divine Love and manifold Ananda. This is the definition of a divine
humanity or a supramental race. This, not an exaggerated or even a sublimated energy of human intellect and
action, is the type of the superman whom we are called to evolve by our Yoga.
\par In the ordinary human existence an outgoing action is obviously three-fourths or even more of our life. It is
only the exceptions, the saint and the seer, the rare thinker, poet and artist who can live more within themselves;
these indeed, at least in the most intimate parts of their nature, shape themselves more in inner thought and
feeling than in the surface act. But it is not either of these sides separated from the other, but rather a harmony
of the inner and the outer life made one in fullness and transfigured into a play of something that is beyond them
which
Page 91

will create the form of a perfect living. A Yoga of works, a union with the Divine in our will and acts—and not
only in knowledge and feeling—is then an indispensable, an inexpressibly important element of an integral Yoga.
The conversion of our thought and feeling without a corresponding conversion of the spirit and body of our works
would be a maimed achievement.
\par But if this total conversion is to be done, there must be a consecration of our actions and outer movements
as much as of our mind and heart to the Divine. There must be accepted and progressively accomplished a
surrender of our capacities of working into the hands of a greater Power behind us and our sense of being the
doer and worker must disappear. All must be given for a more direct use into the hands of the divine Will which
is hidden by these frontal appearances; for by that permitting Will alone is our action possible. A hidden Power is
the true Lord and overruling Observer of our acts and only he knows through all the ignorance and perversion
and deformation brought in by the ego their entire sense and ultimate purpose. There must be effected a
complete transformation of our limited and distorted egoistic life and works into the large and direct outpouring of
a greater divine Life, Will and Energy that now secretly supports us. This greater Will and Energy must be made
conscious in us and master; no longer must it remain, as now, only a superconscious, upholding and permitting
Force. There must be achieved an undistorted transmission through us of the all-wise purpose and process of a
now hidden omniscient Power and omnipotent Knowledge which will turn into its pure, unobstructed, happily
consenting and participating channel all our transmuted nature. This total consecration and surrender and this
resultant entire transformation and free transmission make up the whole fundamental means and the ultimate aim
of an integral Karmayoga.
\par Even for those whose first natural movement is a consecration, a surrender and a resultant entire
transformation of the thinking mind and its knowledge, or a total consecration, surrender and transformation of
the heart and its emotions, the consecration of works is a needed element in that change. Otherwise, although
they may find God in other-life, they will not be
Page 92

able to fulfil the Divine in life; life for them will be a meaningless undivine inconsequence. Not for them the true
victory that shall be the key to the riddle of our terrestrial existence; their love will not be the absolute love
triumphant over self, their knowledge will not be the total consciousness and the all-embracing knowledge. It is
possible, indeed, to begin with knowledge or Godward emotion solely or with both together and to leave works
for the final movement of the Yoga. But there is then this disadvantage that we may tend to live too exclusively
within, subtilised in subjective experience, shut off in our isolated inner parts; there we may get incrusted in our
spiritual seclusion and find it difficult later on to pour ourselves triumphantly outwards and apply to life our gains
in the higher Nature. When we turn to add this external kingdom also to our inner conquests, we shall find
ourselves too much accustomed to an activity purely subjective and ineffective on the material plane. There will
be an immense difficulty in transforming the outer life and the body. Or we shall find that our action does not
correspond with the inner light: it still follows the old accustomed mistaken paths, still obeys the old normal
imperfect influences; the Truth within us continues to be separated by a painful gulf from the ignorant
mechanism of our external nature. This is a frequent experience because in such a process the Light and Power
come to be self-contained and unwilling to express themselves in life or to use the physical means prescribed for
the Earth and her processes. It is as if we were living in another, a larger and subtler world and had no divine
hold, perhaps little hold of any kind, upon the material and terrestrial existence.
\par But still each must follow his nature, and there are always difficulties that have to be accepted for some
time if we are to pursue our natural path of Yoga. Yoga is after all primarily a change of the inner consciousness
and nature, and if the balance of our parts is such that this must be done first with an initial exclusiveness and the
rest left for later handling, we must accept the apparent imperfection of the process. Yet would the ideal working
of an integral Yoga be a movement, even from the beginning, integral in its process and whole and many-sided in
Page 93

its progress. In any case our present preoccupation is with a Yoga, integral in its aim and complete movement,
but starting from works and proceeding by works although at each step more and more moved by a vivifying
divine love and more and more illumined by a helping divine knowledge.
\par
\tstar
\par The greatest gospel of spiritual works ever yet given to the race, the most perfect system of Karmayoga
known to man in the past, is to be found in the Bhagavad Gita. In that famous episode of the Mahabharata the
great basic lines of Karmayoga are laid down for all time with an incomparable mastery and the infallible eye of
an assured experience. It is true that the path alone, as the ancients saw it, is worked out fully: the perfect
fulfilment, the highest secret
\note{\s{rahasyam uttamam}.} is hinted rather than developed; it is kept back as an unexpressed part of a
supreme mystery. There are obvious reasons for this reticence; for the fulfilment is in any case a matter for
experience and no teaching can express it. It cannot be described in a way that can really be understood by a
mind that has not the effulgent transmuting experience. And for the soul that has passed the shining portals and
stands in the blaze of the inner light, all mental and verbal description is as poor as it is superfluous, inadequate
and an impertinence. All divine consummations have perforce to be figured by us in the inapt and deceptive
terms of a language which was made to fit the normal experience of mental man; so expressed, they can be
rightly understood only by those who already know, and, knowing, are able to give these poor external terms a
changed, inner and transfigured sense. As the Vedic Rishis insisted in the beginning, the words of the supreme
wisdom are expressive only to those who are already of the wise. The Gita at its cryptic close may seem by its
silence to stop short of that solution for which we are seeking; it pauses at the borders of the highest spiritual
mind and does not cross them into the splendours of the supramental
Page 94

Light. And yet its secret of dynamic, and not only static, identity with the inner Presence, its highest mystery of
absolute surrender to the Divine Guide, Lord and Inhabitant of our nature, is the central secret. This surrender is
the indispensable means of the supramental change and, again, it is through the supramental change that the
dynamic identity becomes possible.
\par What then are the lines of Karmayoga laid down by the Gita? Its key principle, its spiritual method, can be
summed up as the union of two largest and highest states or powers of consciousness, equality and oneness. The
kernel of its method is an unreserved acceptance of the Divine in our life as in our inner self and spirit. An inner
renunciation of personal desire leads to equality, accomplishes our total surrender to the Divine, supports a
delivery from dividing ego which brings us oneness. But this must be a oneness in dynamic force and not only in
static peace or inactive beatitude. The Gita promises us freedom for the spirit even in the midst of works and the
full energies of Nature, if we accept subjection of our whole being to that which is higher than the separating and
limiting ego. It proposes an integral dynamic activity founded on a still passivity; a largest possible action
irrevocably based on an immobile calm is its secret,—free expression out of a supreme inward silence.
\par All things here are the one and indivisible eternal transcendent and cosmic Brahman that is in its seeming
divided in things and creatures; in seeming only, for in truth it is always one and equal in all things and creatures
and the division is only a phenomenon of the surface. As long as we live in the ignorant seeming, we are the ego
and are subject to the modes of Nature. Enslaved to appearances, bound to the dualities, tossed between good
and evil, sin and virtue, grief and joy, pain and pleasure, good fortune and ill fortune, success and failure, we
follow helplessly the iron or gilt and iron round of the wheel of Maya. At best we have only the poor relative
freedom which by us is ignorantly called free-will. But that is at bottom illusory, since it is the modes of Nature
that express themselves through our personal will; it is force of Nature, grasping us, ungrasped by us that
determines what we shall will and how we shall will it. \NH Nature, not
Page 95

an independent ego, chooses what object we shall seek, whether by reasoned will or unreflecting impulse, at any
moment of our existence. If, on the contrary, we live in the unifying reality of the Brahman, then we go beyond
the ego and overstep Nature. For then we get back to our true self and become the spirit; in the spirit we are
above the impulsion of Nature, superior to her modes and forces. Attaining to a perfect equality in the soul, mind
and heart, we realise our true self of oneness, one with all beings, one too with That which expresses itself in
them and in all that we see and experience. This equality and this oneness are the indispensable twin foundation
we must lay down for a divine being, a divine consciousness, a divine action. Not one with all, we are not
spiritual, not divine. Not equal-souled to all things, happenings and creatures, we cannot see spiritually, cannot
know divinely, cannot feel divinely towards others. The Supreme Power, the one Eternal and Infinite is equal to
all things and to all beings; and because it is equal, it can act with an absolute wisdom according to the truth of its
works and its force and according to the truth of each thing and of every creature.
\par This is also the only true freedom possible to man,—a freedom which he cannot have unless he outgrows his
mental separativeness and becomes the conscious soul in Nature. The only free will in the world is the one divine
Will of which Nature is the executrix; for she is the master and creator of all other wills. Human free-will can be
real in a sense, but, like all things that belong to the modes of Nature, it is only relatively real. The mind rides on a
swirl of natural forces, balances on a poise between several possibilities, inclines to one side or another, settles
and has the sense of choosing: but it does not see, it is not even dimly aware of the Force behind that has
determined its choice. It cannot see it, because that Force is something total and to our eyes indeterminate. At
most mind can only distinguish with an approach to clarity and precision some out of the complex variety of
particular determinations by which this Force works out her incalculable purposes. Partial itself, the mind rides on
a part of the machine, unaware of nine-tenths of its motor agencies in Time and environment, unaware of its past
Page 96

preparation and future drift; but because it rides, it thinks that it is directing the machine. In a sense it counts: for
that clear inclination of the mind which we call our will, that firm settling of the inclination which presents itself to
us as a deliberate choice, is one of Nature's most powerful determinants; but it is never independent and sole.
Behind this petty instrumental action of the human will there is something vast and powerful and eternal that
oversees the trend of the inclination and presses on the turn of the will. There is a total Truth in Nature greater
than our individual choice. And in this total Truth, or even beyond and behind it, there is something that
determines all results; its presence and secret knowledge keep up steadily in the process of Nature a dynamic,
almost automatic perception of the right relations, the varying or persistent necessities, the inevitable steps of the
movement. There is a secret divine Will, eternal and infinite, omniscient and omnipotent, that expresses itself in
the universality and in each particular of all these apparently temporal and finite inconscient or half-conscient
things. This is the Power or Presence meant by the Gita when it speaks of the Lord within the heart of all
existences who turns all creatures as if mounted on a machine by the illusion of Nature.
\par This divine Will is not an alien Power or Presence; it is intimate to us and we ourselves are part of it: for it is
our own highest Self that possesses and supports it. Only, it is not our conscious mental will; it rejects often
enough what our conscious will accepts and accepts what our conscious will rejects. For while this secret One
knows all and every whole and each detail, our surface mind knows only a little part of things. Our will is
conscious in the mind, and what it knows, it knows by the thought only; the divine Will is superconscious to us
because it is in its essence supra-mental, and it knows all because it is all. Our highest Self which possesses and
supports this universal Power is not our ego-self, not our personal nature; it is something transcendent and
universal of which these smaller things are only foam and flowing surface. If we surrender our conscious will
and allow it to be made one with the will of the Eternal, then, and then only, shall we attain to a true freedom;
living in the divine
Page 97

liberty, we shall no longer cling to this shackled so-called free-will, a puppet freedom ignorant, illusory, relative,
bound to the error of its own inadequate vital motives and mental figures.
\par
\tstar
\par A distinction has to be firmly seized in our consciousness, the capital distinction between mechanical Nature
and the free Lord of Nature, between the Ishwara or single luminous divine Will and the many executive modes
and forces of the universe.
\par Nature,—not as she is in her divine Truth, the conscious Power of the Eternal, but as she appears to us in
the Ignorance,—is executive Force, mechanical in her steps, not consciously intelligent to our experience of her,
although all her works are instinct with an absolute intelligence. Not in herself master, she is full of a self-aware
Power
\note{This Power is the conscious divine Shakti of the Ishwara, the transcendent and universal Mother.} which
has an infinite mastery and, because of this Power driving her, she rules all and exactly fulfils the work intended
in her by the Ishwara. Not enjoying but enjoyed, she bears in herself the burden of all enjoyments. Nature as
Prakriti is an inertly active Force,—for she works out a movement imposed upon her; but within her is One that
knows,—some Entity sits there that is aware of all her motion and process. Prakriti works containing the
knowledge, the mastery, the delight of the Purusha, the Being associated with her or seated within her; but she
can participate in them only by subjection and reflection of that which fills her. Purusha knows and is still and
inactive; he contains the action of Prakriti within his consciousness and knowledge and enjoys it. He gives the
sanction to Prakriti's works and she works out what is sanctioned by him for his pleasure. Purusha himself does
not execute; he maintains Prakriti in her action and allows her to express in energy and process and formed
result what he perceives in his knowledge. This is the distinction made by the Sankhyas; and although it is not all
the true truth, not in any way the highest truth either
Page 98

of Purusha or of Prakriti, still it is a valid and indispensable practical knowledge in the lower hemisphere of
existence.
\par The individual soul or the conscious being in a form may identify itself with this experiencing Purusha or with
this active Prakriti. If it identifies itself with Prakriti, it is not master, enjoyer and knower, but reflects the modes
and workings of Prakriti. It enters by its identification into that subjection and mechanical working which is
characteristic of her. And even, by an entire immersion in Prakriti, this soul becomes inconscient or subconscient,
asleep in her forms as in the earth and the metal or almost asleep as in plant life. There, in that inconscience, it is
subject to the domination of tamas, the principle, the power, the qualitative mode of obscurity and inertia: sattwa
and rajas are there, but they are concealed in the thick coating of tamas. Emerging into its own proper nature of
consciousness but not yet truly conscious, because there is still too great a domination of tamas in the nature, the
embodied being becomes more and more subject to rajas, the principle, the power, the qualitative mode of action
and passion impelled by desire and instinct. There is then formed and developed the animal nature, narrow in
consciousness, rudimentary in intelligence, rajaso-tamasic in vital habit and impulse. Emerging yet farther from
the great Inconscience towards a spiritual status the embodied being liberates sattwa, the mode of light, and
acquires a relative freedom and mastery and knowledge and with it a qualified and conditioned sense of inner
satisfaction and happiness. Man, the mental being in a physical body, should be but is not, except in a few among
this multitude of ensouled bodies, of this nature. Ordinarily he has too much in him of the obscure earth-inertia
and a troubled ignorant animal life-force to be a soul of light and bliss or even a mind of harmonious will and
knowledge. There is here in man an incomplete and still hampered and baffled ascension towards the true
character of the Purusha, free, master, knower and enjoyer. For these are in human and earthly experience
relative modes, none giving its single and absolute fruit; all are intermixed with each other and there is not the
pure action of any one of them anywhere. It is their confused and inconstant interaction that
Page 99

determines the experiences of the egoistic human consciousness swinging in Nature's uncertain balance.
\par The sign of the immersion of the embodied soul in Prakriti is the limitation of consciousness to the ego. The
vivid stamp of this limited consciousness can be seen in a constant inequality of the mind and heart and a
confused conflict and disharmony in their varied reactions to the touches of experience. The human reactions
sway perpetually between the dualities created by the soul's subjection to Nature and by its often intense but
narrow struggle for mastery and enjoyment, a struggle for the most part ineffective. The soul circles in an
unending round of Nature's alluring and distressing opposites, success and failure, good fortune and ill fortune,
good and evil, sin and virtue, joy and grief, pain and pleasure. It is only when, awaking from its immersion in
Prakriti, it perceives its oneness with the One and its oneness with all existences that it can become free from
these things and found its right relation to this executive world-Nature. Then it becomes indifferent to her inferior
modes, equal-minded to her dualities, capable of mastery and freedom; it is seated above her as the high-throned
knower and witness filled with the calm intense unalloyed delight of his own eternal existence. The embodied
spirit continues to express its powers in action, but it is no longer involved in ignorance, no longer bound by its
works; its actions have no longer a consequence within it, but only a consequence outside in Prakriti. The whole
movement of Nature becomes to its experience a rising and falling of waves on the surface that make no
difference to its own unfathomable peace, its wide delight, its vast universal equality or its boundless
God-existence.
\note{It is not indispensable for the Karmayoga to accept implicitly all the philosophy of the Gita. We may regard
it, if we like, as a statement of psychological experience useful as a practical basis for the Yoga; here it is
perfectly valid and in entire consonance with a high and wide experience. For this reason I have thought it well to
state it here, as far as possible in the language of modern thought, omitting all that belongs to metaphysics rather
than to psychology.}
\par
\tstar
Page 100

\par These are the conditions of our effort and they point to an ideal which can be expressed in these or
in equivalent formulae.
\par To live in God and not in the ego; to move, vastly founded, not in the little egoistic consciousness, but in the
consciousness of the All-Soul and the Transcendent.
\par To be perfectly equal in all happenings and to all beings, and to see and feel them as one with oneself and
one with the Divine; to feel all in oneself and all in God; to feel God in all, oneself in all.
\par To act in God and not in the ego. And here, first, not to choose action by reference to personal needs and
standards, but in obedience to the dictates of the living highest Truth above us. Next, as soon as we are
sufficiently founded in the spiritual consciousness, not to act any longer by our separate will or movement, but
more and more to allow action to happen and develop under the impulsion and guidance of a divine Will that
surpasses us. And last, the supreme result, to be exalted into an identity in knowledge, force, consciousness, act,
joy of existence with the Divine Shakti; to feel a dynamic movement not dominated by mortal desire and vital
instinct and impulse and illusive mental free-will, but luminously conceived and evolved in an immortal self-delight
and an infinite self-knowledge. For this is the action that comes by a conscious subjection and merging of the
natural man into the divine Self and eternal Spirit; it is the Spirit that for ever transcends and guides this
world-Nature.
\par
\tstar
\par But by what practical steps of self-discipline can we arrive at this consummation?
\par The elimination of all egoistic activity and of its foundation, the egoistic consciousness, is clearly the key to
the consummation we desire. And since in the path of works action is the knot we have first to loosen, we must
endeavour to loosen it where it is centrally tied, in desire and in ego; for otherwise we shall cut only stray strands
and not the heart of our bondage. These are the two knots of our subjection to this ignorant and
Page 101

divided Nature, desire and ego-sense. And of these two desire has its \NH native home in the emotions and
sensations and instincts and from there affects thought and volition; ego-sense lives indeed in these movements,
but it casts its deep roots also in the thinking mind and its will and it is there that it becomes fully self-conscious.
These are the twin obscure powers of the obsessing world-wide Ignorance that we have to enlighten and
eliminate.
\par In the field of action desire takes many forms, but the most powerful of all is the vital self's craving or
seeking after the fruit of our works. The fruit we covet may be a reward of internal pleasure; it may be the
accomplishment of some preferred idea or some cherished will or the satisfaction of the egoistic emotions, or
else the pride of success of our highest hopes and ambitions. Or it may be an external reward, a recompense
entirely material,—wealth, position, honour, victory, good fortune or any other fulfilment of vital or physical
desire. But all alike are lures by which egoism holds us. Always these satisfactions delude us with the sense of
mastery and the idea of freedom, while really we are harnessed and guided or ridden and whipped by some gross
or subtle, some noble or ignoble, figure of the blind Desire that drives the world. Therefore the first rule of action
laid down by the Gita is to do the work that should be done without any desire for the fruit, \s{ni\,sk\=ama karma}.
\par A simple rule in appearance, and yet how difficult to carry out with anything like an absolute sincerity and
liberating entireness! In the greater part of our action we use the principle very little if at all, and then even
mostly as a sort of counterpoise to the normal principle of desire and to mitigate the extreme action of that tyrant
impulse. At best, we are satisfied if we arrive at a modified and disciplined egoism not too shocking to our moral
sense, not too brutally offensive to others. And to our partial self-discipline we give various names and forms; we
habituate ourselves by practice to the sense of duty, to a firm fidelity to principle, a stoical fortitude or a religious
resignation, a quiet or an ecstatic submission to God's will. But it is not these things that the Gita intends, useful
though they are in their place; it aims at something absolute, unmitigated, uncompromising, a
Page 102

turn, an attitude that will change the whole poise of the soul. Not the mind's control of vital impulse is its rule, but
the strong immobility of an immortal spirit.
\par The test it lays down is an absolute equality of the mind and the heart to all results, to all reactions, to all
happenings. If good fortune and ill fortune, if respect and insult, if reputation and obloquy, if victory and defeat, if
pleasant event and sorrowful event leave us not only unshaken but untouched, free in the emotions, free in the
nervous reactions, free in the mental view, not responding with the least disturbance or vibration in any spot of
the nature, then we have the absolute liberation to which the Gita points us, but not otherwise. The tiniest
reaction is a proof that the discipline is imperfect and that some part of us accepts ignorance and bondage as its
law and clings still to the old nature. Our self-conquest is only partially accomplished; it is still imperfect or unreal
in some stretch or part or smallest spot of the ground of our nature. And that little pebble of imperfection may
throw down the whole achievement of the Yoga!
\par There are certain semblances of an equal spirit which must not be mistaken for the profound and vast
spiritual equality which the Gita teaches. There is an equality of disappointed resignation, an equality of pride, an
equality of hardness and indifference: all these are egoistic in their nature. Inevitably they come in the course of
the sadhana, but they must be rejected or transformed into the true quietude. There is too, on a higher level, the
equality of the stoic, the equality of a devout resignation or a sage detachment, the equality of a soul aloof from
the world and indifferent to its doings. These too are insufficient; first approaches they can be, but they are at
most early soul-phases only or imperfect mental preparations for our entry into the true and absolute self-existent
wide evenness of the spirit.
\par For it is certain that so great a result cannot be arrived at immediately and without any previous stages. At
first we have to learn to bear the shocks of the world with the central part of our being untouched and silent,
even when the surface mind, heart,
Page 103

life are strongly shaken; unmoved there on the bedrock of our life, we must separate the soul watching behind or
immune deep within from these outer workings of our nature. Afterwards, extending this calm and steadfastness
of the detached soul to its instruments, it will become slowly possible to radiate peace from the luminous centre
to the darker peripheries. In this process we may take the passing help of many minor phases; a certain stoicism,
a certain calm philosophy, a certain religious exaltation may help us towards some nearness to our aim, or we
may call in even less strong and exalted but still useful powers of our mental nature. In the end we must either
discard or transform them and arrive instead at an entire equality, a perfect self-existent peace within and even,
if we can, a total unassailable, self-poised and spontaneous delight in all our members.
\par But how then shall we continue to act at all? For ordinarily the human being acts because he has a desire or
feels a mental, vital or physical want or need; he is driven by the necessities of the body, by the lust of riches,
honours or fame, or by a craving for the personal satisfactions of the mind or the heart or a craving for power or
pleasure. Or he is seized and pushed about by a moral need or, at least, the need or the desire of making his
ideas or his ideals or his will or his party or his country or his gods prevail in the world. If none of these desires
nor any other must be the spring of our action, it would seem as if all incentive or motive power had been
removed and action itself must necessarily cease. The Gita replies with its third great secret of the divine life. All
action must be done in a more and more Godward and finally a God-possessed consciousness; our works must
be a sacrifice to the Divine and in the end a surrender of all our being, mind, will, heart, sense, life and body to
the One must make God-love and God-service our only motive. This transformation of the motive force and very
character of works is indeed its master idea; it is the foundation of its unique synthesis of works, love and
knowledge. In the end not desire, but the consciously felt will of the Eternal remains as the sole driver of our
action and the sole originator of its initiative.
Page 104

\par Equality, renunciation of all desire for the fruit of our works, action done as a sacrifice to the supreme Lord
of our nature and of all nature,—these are the three first Godward approaches in the Gita's way of Karmayoga.
Page 105

\par
\hn Chapter IV
\par
\ht The Sacrifice, the Triune Path and the Lord of the Sacrifice
\par\drop The law of sacrifice is the common divine action that was thrown out into the world in its beginning as
a symbol of the solidarity of the universe. It is by the attraction of this law that a divinising principle, a saving
power descends to limit and correct and gradually to eliminate the errors of an egoistic and self-divided creation.
This descent, this sacrifice of the Purusha, the Divine Soul submitting itself to Force and Matter so that it may
inform and illuminate them, is the seed of redemption of this world of Inconscience and Ignorance. “For with
sacrifice as their companion,” says the Gita, “the All-Father created these peoples.” The acceptance of the law
of sacrifice is a practical recognition by the ego that it is neither alone in the world nor chief in the world. It is its
admission that, even in this much fragmented existence, there is beyond itself and behind that which is not its
own egoistic person, something greater and completer, a diviner All which demands from it subordination and
service. Indeed, sacrifice is imposed and, where need be, compelled by the universal World-Force; it takes it
even from those who do not consciously recognise the law,—inevitably, because this is the intrinsic nature of
things. Our ignorance or our false egoistic view of life can make no difference to this eternal bedrock truth of
Nature. For this is the truth in Nature, that this ego which thinks itself a separate independent being and claims to
live for itself, is not and cannot be independent nor separate, nor can it live to itself even if it would, but rather all
are linked together by a secret Oneness. Each existence is continually giving out perforce from its stock; out of
its mental receipts from Nature or its vital and physical assets and acquisitions and belongings a stream goes to
all that is around it. And
Page 106

always again it receives something from its environment gratis or in return for its voluntary or involuntary tribute.
For it is only by this giving and receiving that it can effect its own growth while at the same time it helps the sum
of things. At length, though at first slowly and partially, we learn to make the conscious sacrifice; even, in the
end, we take joy to give ourselves and what we envisage as belonging to us in a spirit of love and devotion to
That which appears for the moment other than ourselves and is certainly other than our limited personalities. The
sacrifice and the divine return for our sacrifice then become a gladly accepted means towards our last
perfection; for it is recognised now as the road to the fulfilment in us of the eternal purpose.
\par But, most often, the sacrifice is done unconsciously, egoistically and without knowledge or acceptance of the
true meaning of the great world-rite. It is so that the vast majority of earth-creatures do it; and, when it is so
done, the individual derives only a mechanical minimum of natural inevitable profit, achieves by it only a slow
painful progress limited and tortured by the smallness and suffering of the ego. Only when the heart, the will and
the mind of knowledge associate themselves with the law and gladly follow it, can there come the deep joy and
the happy fruitfulness of divine sacrifice. The mind's knowledge of the law and the heart's gladness in it
culminate in the perception that it is to our own Self and Spirit and the one Self and Spirit of all that we give. And
this is true even when our self-offering is still to our fellow-creatures or to lesser Powers and Principles and not
yet to the Supreme. “Not for the sake of the wife,” says Yajnavalkya in the Upanishad, “but for the sake of the
Self is the wife dear to us.” This in the lower sense of the individual self is the hard fact behind the coloured and
passionate professions of egoistic love; but in a higher sense it is the inner significance of that love too which is
not egoistic but divine. All true love and all sacrifice are in their essence Nature's contradiction of the primary
egoism and its separative error; it is her attempt to turn from a necessary first fragmentation towards a
recovered oneness. All unity between creatures is in its essence a self-finding, a fusion with that from which we
have separated, a discovery of one's self in others.
Page 107

\par But it is only a divine love and unity that can possess in the light what the human forms of these things seek
for in the darkness. For the true unity is not merely an association and agglomeration like that of physical cells
joined by a life of common interests; it is not even an emotional understanding, sympathy, solidarity or close
drawing together. Only then are we really unified with those separated from us by the divisions of Nature, when
we annul the division and find ourselves in that which seemed to us not ourselves. Association is a vital and
physical unity; its sacrifice is that of mutual aid and concessions. Nearness, sympathy, solidarity create a mental,
moral and emotional unity; theirs is a sacrifice of mutual support and mutual gratifications. But the true unity is
spiritual; its sacrifice is a mutual self-giving, an interfusion of our inner substance. The law of sacrifice travels in
Nature towards its culmination in this complete and unreserved self-giving; it awakens the consciousness of one
common self in the giver and the object of the sacrifice. This culmination of sacrifice is the height even of human
love and devotion when it tries to become divine; for there too the highest peak of love points into a heaven of
complete mutual self-giving, its summit is the rapturous fusing of two souls into one.
\par This profounder idea of the world-wide law is at the heart of the teaching about works given in the Gita; a
spiritual union with the Highest by sacrifice, an unreserved self-giving to the Eternal is the core of its doctrine.
The vulgar conception of sacrifice is an act of painful self-immolation, austere self-mortification, difficult
self-effacement; this kind of sacrifice may go even as far as self-mutilation and self-torture. These things may be
temporarily necessary in man's hard endeavour to exceed his natural self; if the egoism in his nature is violent
and obstinate, it has to be met sometimes by an answering strong internal repression and counterbalancing
violence. But the Gita discourages any excess of violence done to oneself; for the self within is really the
Godhead evolving, it is Krishna, it is the Divine; it has not to be troubled and tortured as the Titans of the world
trouble and torture it, but to be increased, fostered, cherished, luminously opened to a divine light and strength and
joy and wideness. It
Page 108

is not one's self, but the band of the spirit's inner enemies that we have to discourage, expel, slay upon the altar
of the growth of the spirit; these can be ruthlessly excised, whose names are desire, wrath, inequality, greed,
attachment to outward pleasures and pains, the cohort of usurping demons that are the cause of the soul's errors
and sufferings. These should be regarded not as part of oneself but as intruders and perverters of our self's real
and diviner nature; these have to be sacrificed in the harsher sense of the word, whatever pain in going they may
throw by reflection on the consciousness of the seeker.
\par But the true essence of sacrifice is not self-immolation, it is self-giving; its object not self-effacement, but
self-fulfilment; its method not self-mortification, but a greater life, not self-mutilation, but a transformation of our
natural human parts into divine members, not self-torture, but a passage from a lesser satisfaction to a greater
Ananda. There is only one thing painful in the beginning to a raw or turbid part of the surface nature; it is the
indispensable discipline demanded, the denial necessary for the merging of the incomplete ego. But for that there
can be a speedy and enormous compensation in the discovery of a real greater or ultimate completeness in
others, in all things, in the cosmic oneness, in the freedom of the transcendent Self and Spirit, in the rapture of the
touch of the Divine. Our sacrifice is not a giving without any return or any fruitful acceptance from the other
side; it is an interchange between the embodied soul and conscious Nature in us and the eternal Spirit. For even
though no return is demanded, yet there is the knowledge deep within us that a marvellous return is inevitable.
The soul knows that it does not give itself to God in vain; claiming nothing, it yet receives the infinite riches of the
divine Power and Presence.
\par Last, there is to be considered the recipient of the sacrifice and the manner of the sacrifice. The sacrifice
may be offered to others or it may be offered to divine Powers; it may be offered to the cosmic All or it may be
offered to the transcendent Supreme. The worship given may take any shape from the dedication of a leaf or
flower, a cup of water, a handful of rice, a loaf of bread, to consecration of all that we possess and the
submission of all
Page 109

that we are. Whoever the recipient, whatever the gift, it is the Supreme, the Eternal in things, who receives and
accepts it, even if it be rejected or ignored by the immediate recipient. For the Supreme who transcends the
universe, is yet here too, however veiled, in us and in the world and in its happenings; he is there as the
omniscient Witness and Receiver of all our works and their secret Master. All our actions, all our efforts, even
our sins and stumblings and sufferings and struggles are obscurely or consciously, known to us and seen or else
unknown and in a disguise, governed in their last result by the One. All is turned towards him in his numberless
forms and offered through them to the single Omnipresence. In whatever form and with whatever spirit we
approach him, in that form and with that spirit he receives the sacrifice.
\par And the fruit also of the sacrifice of works varies according to the work, according to the intention in the
work and according to the spirit that is behind the intention. But all other sacrifices are partial, egoistic, mixed,
temporal, incomplete,—even those offered to the highest Powers and Principles keep this character: the result
too is partial, limited, temporal, mixed in its reactions, effective only for a minor or intermediate purpose. The one
entirely acceptable sacrifice is a last and highest and uttermost self-giving,—it is that surrender made face to
face, with devotion and knowledge, freely and without any reserve to One who is at once our immanent Self, the
environing constituent All, the Supreme Reality beyond this or any manifestation and, secretly, all these together,
concealed everywhere, the immanent Transcendence. For to the soul that wholly gives itself to him, God also
gives himself altogether. Only the one who offers his whole nature, finds the Self. Only the one who can give
everything, enjoys the Divine All everywhere. Only a supreme self-abandonment attains to the Supreme. Only
the sublimation by sacrifice of all that we are, can enable us to embody the Highest and live here in the immanent
consciousness of the transcendent Spirit.
\par
\tstar
Page 110

\par This, in short, is the demand made on us, that we should turn our whole life into a conscious sacrifice. Every
moment and every movement of our being is to be resolved into a continuous and a devoted self-giving to the
Eternal. All our actions, not less the smallest and most ordinary and trifling than the greatest and most uncommon
and noble, must be performed as consecrated acts. Our individualised nature must live in the single
consciousness of an inner and outer movement dedicated to Something that is beyond us and greater than our
ego. No matter what the gift or to whom it is presented by us, there must be a consciousness in the act that we
are presenting it to the one divine Being in all beings. Our commonest or most grossly material actions must
assume this sublimated character; when we eat, we should be conscious that we are giving our food to that
Presence in us; it must be a sacred offering in a temple and the sense of a mere physical need or
self-gratification must pass away from us. In any great labour, in any high discipline, in any difficult or noble
enterprise, whether undertaken for ourselves, for others or for the race, it will no longer be possible to stop short
at the idea of the race, of ourselves or of others. The thing we are doing must be consciously offered as a
sacrifice of works, not to these, but either through them or directly to the One Godhead; the Divine Inhabitant
who was hidden by these figures must be no longer hidden but ever present to our soul, our mind, our sense. The
workings and results of our acts must be put in the hands of that One in the feeling that that Presence is the
Infinite and Most High by whom alone our labour and our aspiration are possible. For in his being all takes place;
for him all labour and aspiration are taken from us by Nature and offered on his altar. Even in those things in
which Nature is herself very plainly the worker and we only the witnesses of her working and its containers and
supporters, there should be the same constant memory and insistent consciousness of a work and of its divine
Master. Our very inspiration and respiration, our very heart-beats can and must be made conscious in us as the
living rhythm of the universal sacrifice.
\par It is clear that a conception of this kind and its effective
Page 111

practice must carry in them three results that are of a central importance for our spiritual ideal. It is evident, to
begin with, that, even if such a discipline is begun without devotion, it leads straight and inevitably towards the
highest devotion possible; for it must deepen naturally into the completest adoration imaginable, the most
profound God-love. There is bound up with it a growing sense of the Divine in all things, a deepening communion
with the Divine in all our thought, will and action and at every moment of our lives, a more and more moved
consecration to the Divine of the totality of our being. Now these implications of the Yoga of works are also of
the very essence of an integral and absolute Bhakti. The seeker who puts them into living practice makes in
himself continually a constant, active and effective representation of the very spirit of self-devotion, and it is
inevitable that out of it there should emerge the most engrossing worship of the Highest to whom is given this
service. An absorbing love for the Divine Presence to whom he feels an always more intimate closeness, grows
upon the consecrated worker. And with it is born or in it is contained a universal love too for all these beings,
living forms and creatures that are habitations of the Divine—not the brief restless grasping emotions of division,
but the settled selfless love that is the deeper vibration of oneness. In all the seeker begins to meet the one
Object of his adoration and service. The way of works turns by this road of sacrifice to meet the path of
Devotion; it can be itself a devotion as complete, as absorbing, as integral as any the desire of the heart can ask
for or the passion of the mind can imagine.
\par Next, the practice of this Yoga demands a constant inward remembrance of the one central liberating
knowledge, and a constant active externalising of it in works comes in too to intensify the remembrance. In all is
the one Self, the one Divine is all; all are in the Divine, all are the Divine and there is nothing else in the
universe,—this thought or this faith is the whole background until it becomes the whole substance of the
consciousness of the worker. A memory, a self-dynamising meditation of this kind, must and does in its end turn
into a profound and \NH uninterrupted
Page 112

vision and a vivid and all-embracing consciousness of that which we so powerfully remember or on which we so
constantly meditate. For it compels a constant reference at each moment to the Origin of all being and will and
action and there is at once an embracing and exceeding of all particular forms and appearances in That which is
their cause and upholder. This way cannot go to its end without a seeing vivid and vital, as concrete in its way as
physical sight, of the works of the universal Spirit everywhere. On its summits it rises into a constant living and
thinking and willing and acting in the presence of the Supramental, the Transcendent. Whatever we see and hear,
whatever we touch and sense, all of which we are conscious, has to be known and felt by us as That which we
worship and serve; all has to be turned into an image of the Divinity, perceived as a dwelling-place of his
Godhead, enveloped with the eternal Omnipresence. In its close, if not long before it, this way of works turns by
communion with the Divine Presence, Will and Force into a way of Knowledge more complete and integral than
any the mere creature intelligence can construct or the search of the intellect can discover.
\par Lastly, the practice of this Yoga of sacrifice compels us to renounce all the inner supports of egoism, casting
them out of our mind and will and actions, and to eliminate its seed, its presence, its influence out of our nature.
All must be done for the Divine; all must be directed towards the Divine. Nothing must be attempted for
ourselves as a separate existence; nothing done for others, whether neighbours, friends, family, country or
mankind or other creatures merely because they are connected with our personal life and thought and sentiment
or because the ego takes a preferential interest in their welfare. In this way of doing and seeing all works and all
life become only a daily dynamic worship and service of the Divine in the unbounded temple of his own vast
cosmic existence. Life becomes more and more the sacrifice of the eternal in the individual constantly
self-offered to the eternal Transcendence. It is offered in the wide sacrificial ground of the field of the eternal
cosmic Spirit; and the Force too that offers it is the eternal Force, the omnipresent
Page 113

Mother. Therefore is this way a way of union and communion by acts and by the spirit and knowledge in the act
as complete and integral as any our Godward will can hope for or our soul's strength execute.
\par It has all the power of a way of works integral and absolute, but because of its law of sacrifice and
self-giving to the Divine Self and Master, it is accompanied on its one side by the whole power of the path of
Love and on the other by the whole power of the path of Knowledge. At its end all these three divine Powers
work together, fused, united, completed, perfected by each other.
\par
\tstar
\par The Divine, the Eternal is the Lord of our sacrifice of works and union with him in all our being and
consciousness and in its expressive instruments is the one object of the sacrifice; the steps of the sacrifice of
works must therefore be measured, first, by the growth in our nature of something that brings us nearer to divine
Nature, but secondly also by an experience of the Divine, his presence, his manifestation to us, an increasing
closeness and union with that Presence. But the Divine is in his essence infinite and his manifestation too is
multitudinously infinite. If that is so, it is not likely that our true integral perfection in being and in nature can come
by one kind of realisation alone; it must combine many different strands of divine experience. It cannot be
reached by the exclusive pursuit of a single line of identity till that is raised to its absolute; it must harmonise
many aspects of the Infinite. An integral consciousness with a multiform dynamic experience is essential for the
complete transformation of our nature.
\par There is one fundamental perception indispensable towards any integral knowledge or many-sided
experience of this Infinite. It is to realise the Divine in its essential self and truth unaltered by forms and
phenomena. Otherwise we are likely to remain caught in the net of appearances or wander confusedly in a
chaotic multitude of cosmic or particular aspects, and if we
Page 114

avoid this confusion, it will be at the price of getting chained to some mental formula or shut up in a limited
personal experience. The one secure and all-reconciling truth which is the very foundation of the universe is this
that life is the manifestation of an uncreated Self and Spirit, and the key to life's hidden secret is the true relation
of this Spirit with its own created existences. There is behind all this life the look of an eternal Being upon its
multitudinous becomings; there is around and everywhere in it the envelopment and penetration of a
manifestation in time by an unmanifested timeless Eternal. But this knowledge is valueless for Yoga if it is only
an intellectual and metaphysical notion void of life and barren of consequence; a mental realisation alone cannot
be sufficient for the seeker. For what Yoga searches after is not truth of thought alone or truth of mind alone, but
the dynamic truth of a living and revealing spiritual experience. There must awake in us a constant indwelling and
enveloping nearness, a vivid perception, a close feeling and communion, a concrete sense and contact of a true
and infinite Presence always and everywhere. That Presence must remain with us as the living, pervading
Reality in which we and all things exist and move and act, and we must feel it always and everywhere, concrete,
visible, inhabiting all things; it must be patent to us as their true Self, tangible as their imperishable Essence, met
by us closely as their inmost Spirit. To see, to feel, to sense, to contact in every way and not merely to conceive
this Self and Spirit here in all existences and to feel with the same vividness all existences in this Self and Spirit,
is the fundamental experience which must englobe all other knowledge.
\par This infinite and eternal Self of things is an omnipresent Reality, one existence everywhere; it is a single
unifying presence and not different in different creatures; it can be met, seen or felt in its completeness in each
soul or each form in the universe. For its infinity is spiritual and essential and not merely a boundlessness in
Space or an endlessness in Time; the Infinite can be felt in an infinitesimal atom or in a second of time as
convincingly as in the stretch of the aeons or the stupendous enormity of the intersolar spaces. The knowledge or
experience of it can begin
Page 115

anywhere and express itself through anything; for the Divine is in all, and all is the Divine.
\par This fundamental experience will yet begin differently for different natures and take long to develop all the
Truth that it conceals in its thousand aspects. I see perhaps or feel in myself or as myself first the eternal
Presence and afterwards only can extend the vision or sense of this greater self of mine to all creatures. I then
see the world in me or as one with me. I perceive the universe as a scene in my being, the play of its processes
as a movement of forms and souls and forces in my cosmic spirit; I meet myself and none else everywhere. Not,
be it well noted, with the error of the Asura, the Titan, who lives in his own inordinately magnified shadow,
mistakes ego for the self and spirit and tries to impose his fragmentary personality as the one dominant existence
upon all his surroundings. For, having the knowledge, I have already seized this reality that my true self is the
non-ego, so always my greater Self is felt by me either as an impersonal vastness or an essential Person
containing yet beyond all personalities or as both these together; but in any case, whether Impersonal or
illimitable Personal or both together, it is an ego-exceeding Infinite. If I have sought it out and found it first in the
form of it I call myself rather than in others, it is only because there it is easiest for me, owing to the subjectivity
of my consciousness, to find it, to know it at once and to realise it. But if the narrow instrumental ego does not
begin to merge in this Self as soon as it is seen, if the smaller external mind-constructed I refuses to disappear
into that greater permanent uncreated spiritual I, then my realisation is either not genuine or radically imperfect.
There is somewhere in me an egoistic obstacle; some part of my nature has opposed a self-regarding and
self-preserving denial to the all-swallowing truth of the Spirit.
\par On the other hand—and to some this is an easier way—I may see the Divinity first in the world outside me,
not in myself but in others. I meet it there from the beginning as an indwelling and all-containing Infinite that is
not bound up with all these
Page 116

forms, creatures and forces which it bears on its surface. Or else I see and feel it as a pure solitary Self and
Spirit which contains all these powers and existences, and I lose my sense of ego in the silent Omnipresence
around me. Afterwards it is this that begins to pervade and possess my instrumental being and out of it seem to
proceed all my impulsions to action, all my light of thought and speech, all the formations of my consciousness
and all its relations and impacts with other soul-forms of this one world-wide Existence. I am already no longer
this little personal self, but That with something of itself put forward which sustains a selected form of its
workings in the universe.
\par There is another basic realisation, the most extreme of all, that yet comes sometimes as the first decisive
opening or an early turn of the Yoga. It is the awakening to an ineffable high transcendent Unknowable above
myself and above this world in which I seem to move, a timeless and spaceless condition or entity which is at
once, in some way compelling and convincing to an essential consciousness in me, the one thing that is to it
overwhelmingly real. This experience is usually accompanied by an equally compelling sense either of the
dreamlike or shadowy illusoriness of all things here or else of their temporary, derivative and only half-real
character. For a time at least all around me may seem to be a moving of cinematographic shadow forms or
surface figures and my own action may appear as a fluid formulation from some Source ungrasped as yet and
perhaps unseizable above or outside me. To remain in this consciousness, to carry out this initiation or follow out
this first suggestion of the character of things would be to proceed towards the goal of dissolution of self and
world in the Unknowable,—Moksha, Nirvana. But this is not the only line of issue; it is possible, on the contrary,
for me to wait till through the silence of this timeless unfilled liberation I begin to enter into relations with that yet
ungrasped Source of myself and my actions; then the void begins to fill, there emerges out of it or there rushes
into it all the manifold Truth of the Divine, all the aspects and manifestations and many levels of a dynamic
Infinite. At first this experience imposes on the mind and then on all our being an
Page 117

absolute, a fathomless, almost an abysmal peace and silence. Overpowered and subjugated, stilled, liberated from
itself, the mind accepts the Silence itself as the Supreme. But afterwards the seeker discovers that all is there for
him contained or new-made in that silence or through it descends upon him from a greater concealed
transcendent Existence. For this Transcendent, this Absolute is not a mere peace of signless emptiness; it has its
own infinite contents and riches of which ours are debased and diminished values. If there were not that Source
of all things, there could be no universe; all powers, all works and activities would be an illusion, all creation and
manifestation would be impossible.
\par These are the three fundamental realisations, so fundamental that to the Yogin of the way of Knowledge
they seem ultimate, sufficient in themselves, destined to overtop and replace all others. And yet for the integral
seeker, whether accorded to him at an early stage suddenly and easily by a miraculous grace or achieved with
difficulty after a long progress and endeavour, they are neither the sole truth nor the full and only clues to the
integral truth of the Eternal, but rather the unfilled beginning, the vast foundation of a greater divine Knowledge.
Other realisations there are that are imperatively needed and must be explored to the full limit of their
possibilities; and if some of them appear to a first sight to cover only Divine Aspects that are instrumental to the
activity of existence but not inherent in its essence, yet, when followed to their end through that activity to its
everlasting Source, it is found that they lead to a disclosure of the Divine without which our knowledge of the
Truth behind things would be left bare and incomplete. These seeming Instrumentals are the key to a secret
without which the Fundamentals themselves would not unveil all their mystery. All the revelatory aspects of the
Divine must be caught in the wide net of the integral Yoga.
\par
\tstar
\par If a departure from the world and its activities, a supreme release and quietude were the sole aim of the
seeker, the three great
Page 118

fundamental realisations would be sufficient for the fulfilment of his spiritual life: concentrated in them alone he
could suffer all other divine or mundane knowledge to fall away from him and himself unencumbered, depart into
the eternal Silence. But he has to take account of the world and its activities, learn what divine truth there may
be behind them and reconcile that apparent opposition between the Divine Truth and the manifest creation which
is the starting-point of most spiritual experience. Here, on each line of approach that he can take, he is
confronted with a constant Duality, a separation between two terms of existence that seem to be opposites and
their opposition to be the very root of the riddle of the universe. Later, he may and does discover that these are
the two poles of One Being, connected by two simultaneous currents of energy negative and positive in relation
to each other, their interaction the very condition for the manifestation of what is within the Being, their reunion
the appointed means for the reconciliation of life's discords and for the discovery of the integral truth of which he
is the seeker.
\par For on one side he is aware of this Self everywhere, this everlasting Spirit-Substance—Brahman, the
Eternal—the same self-existence here in time behind each appearance he sees or senses and timeless beyond
the universe. He has this strong overpowering experience of a Self that is neither our limited ego nor our mind,
life or body, world-wide but not outwardly phenomenal, yet to some spirit-sense in him more concrete than any
form or phenomenon, universal yet not dependent for its being on anything in the universe or on the whole totality
of the universe; if all this were to disappear, its extinction would make no difference to this Eternal of his
constant intimate experience. He is sure of an inexpressible Self-Existence which is the essence of himself and
all things; he is intimately aware of an essential Consciousness of which thinking mind and life-sense and
body-sense are only partial and diminished figures, a Consciousness with an illimitable Force in it of which all
energies are the outcome, but which is yet not explained or accounted for by the sum or power or nature of all
these energies together; he feels, he lives in an inalienable self-existent Bliss which is not this lesser
Page 119

transient joy or happiness or pleasure. A changeless imperishable infinity, a timeless eternity, a self-awareness
which is not this receptive and reactive or tentacular mental consciousness, but is behind and above it and
present too below it, even in what we call Inconscience, a oneness in which there is no possibility of any other
existence, are the fourfold character of this settled experience. Yet this eternal Self-Existence is seen by him
also as a conscious Time-Spirit bearing the stream of happenings, a self-extended spiritual Space containing all
things and beings, a Spirit-Substance which is the very form and material of all that seems non-spiritual,
temporary and finite. For all that is transitory, temporal, spatial, bounded, is yet felt by him to be in its substance
and energy and power no other than the One, the Eternal, the Infinite.
\par And yet there is not only in him or before him this eternal self-aware Existence, this spiritual Consciousness,
this infinity of self-illumined Force, this timeless and endless Beatitude. There is too, constant also to his
experience, this universe in measurable Space and Time, some kind perhaps of boundless finite, and in it all is
transient, limited, fragmentary, plural, ignorant, exposed to disharmony and suffering, seeking vaguely for some
unrealised yet inherent harmony of oneness, unconscious or half-conscious or, even when most conscious, still
tied to the original Ignorance and Inconscience. He is not always in a trance of peace or bliss and, even if he
were, it would be no solution, for he knows that this would still be going on outside him and yet within some
larger self of him as if for ever. At times these two states of his spirit seem to exist for him alternately according
to his state of consciousness; at others they are there as two parts of his being, disparate and to be reconciled,
two halves, an upper and a lower or an inner and an outer half of his existence. He finds soon that this separation
in his consciousness has an immense liberative power; for by it he is no longer bound to the Ignorance, the
Inconscience; it no longer appears to him the very nature of himself and things but an illusion which can be
overcome or at least a temporary wrong self-experience, Maya. It is tempting to regard it as only a contradiction
of the Divine,
Page 120

an incomprehensible mystery-play, masque or travesty of the Infinite—and so it irresistibly seems to his
experience at times, on one side the luminous verity of Brahman, on the other a dark illusion of Maya. But
something in him will not allow him to cut existence thus permanently in two and, looking more closely, he
discovers that in this half-light or darkness too is the Eternal—it is the Brahman who is here with this face of
Maya.
\par This is the beginning of a growing spiritual experience which reveals to him more and more that what
seemed to him dark incomprehensible Maya was all the time no other than the Consciousness-Puissance of the
Eternal, timeless and illimitable beyond the universe, but spread out here under a mask of bright and dark
opposites for the miracle of the slow manifestation of the Divine in Mind and Life and Matter. All the Timeless
presses towards the play in Time; all in Time turns upon and around the timeless Spirit. If the separate
experience was liberative, this unitive experience is dynamic and effective. For he now not only feels himself to
be in his soul-substance part of the Eternal, in his essential self and spirit entirely one with the Eternal, but in his
active nature an instrumentation of its omniscient and omnipotent Consciousness-Puissance. However bounded
and relative its present play in him, he can open to a greater and greater consciousness and power of it and to
that expansion there seems to be no assignable limit. A level spiritual and supramental of that
Consciousness-Puissance seems even to reveal itself above him and lean to enter into contact, where there are
not these trammels and limits, and its powers too are pressing upon the play in Time with the promise of a
greater descent and a less disguised or no longer disguised manifestation of the Eternal. The once conflicting but
now biune duality of Brahman-Maya stands revealed to him as the first great dynamic aspect of the Self of all
selves, the Master of existence, the Lord of the world-sacrifice and of his sacrifice.
\par On another line of approach another Duality presents itself to the experience of the seeker. On one side he
becomes aware of a witness recipient observing experiencing Consciousness which does not appear to act but
for which all these activities inside
Page 121

and outside us seem to be undertaken and continue. On the other side he is aware at the same time of an
executive Force or an energy of Process which is seen to constitute, drive and guide all conceivable activities
and to create a myriad forms visible to us and invisible and use them as stable supports for its incessant flux of
action and creation. Entering exclusively into the witness consciousness he becomes silent, untouched, immobile;
he sees that he has till now passively reflected and appropriated to himself the movements of Nature and it is by
this reflection that they acquired from the witness soul within him what seemed a spiritual value and significance.
But now he has withdrawn that ascription or mirroring identification; he is conscious only of his silent self and
aloof from all that is in motion around it; all activities are outside him and at once they cease to be intimately real;
they appear now mechanical, detachable, endable. Entering exclusively into the kinetic movement, he has an
opposite self-awareness; he seems to his own perception a mass of activities, a formation and result of forces; if
there is an active consciousness, even some kind of kinetic being in the midst of it all, yet there is no longer a free
soul in it anywhere. These two different and opposite states of being alternate in him or else stand simultaneously
over against each other; one silent in the inner being observes but is unmoved and does not participate; the other
active in some outer or surface self pursues its habitual movements. He has entered into an intense separative
perception of the great duality, Soul-Nature, Purusha-Prakriti.
\par But as the consciousness deepens, he becomes aware that this is only a first frontal appearance. For he
finds that it is by the silent support, permission or sanction of this witness soul in him that this executive nature
can work intimately or persistently upon his being; if the soul withdraws its sanction, the movements of Nature in
their action upon and within him become a wholly mechanical repetition, vehement at first as if seeking still to
enforce their hold, but afterwards less and less dynamic and real. More actively using this power of sanction or
refusal, he perceives that he can, slowly and uncertainly at first,
Page 122

more decisively afterwards, change the movements of Nature. Eventually in this witness soul or behind it is
revealed to him the presence of a Knower and master Will in Nature, and all her activities more and more
appear as an expression of what is known and either actively willed or passively permitted by this Lord of her
existence. Prakriti herself now seems to be mechanical only in the carefully regulated appearance of her
workings, but in fact a conscious Force with a soul within her, a self-aware significance in her turns, a revelation
of a secret Will and Knowledge in her steps and figures. This Duality, in aspect separate, is inseparable.
Wherever there is Prakriti, there is Purusha; wherever there is Purusha, there is Prakriti. Even in his inactivity he
holds in himself all her force and energies ready for projection; even in the drive of her action she carries with
her all his observing and mandatory consciousness as the whole support and sense of her creative purpose. Once
more the seeker discovers in his experience the two poles of existence of One Being and the two lines or
currents of their energy negative and positive in relation to each other which effect by their \NH simultaneity the
manifestation of all that is within it. Here too he finds that the separative aspect is liberative; for it releases him
from the bondage of identification with the inadequate workings of Nature in the Ignorance. The unitive aspect is
dynamic and effective; for it enables him to arrive at mastery and perfection; while rejecting what is less divine
or seemingly undivine in her, he can rebuild her forms and movements in himself according to a nobler pattern
and the law and rhythm of a greater existence. At a certain spiritual and supramental level the Duality becomes
still more perfectly Two-in-one, the Master Soul with the Conscious Force within it, and its potentiality disowns
all barriers and breaks through every limit. Thus this once separate, now biune Duality of Purusha-Prakriti is
revealed to him in all its truth as the second great instrumental and effective aspect of the Soul of all souls, the
Master of existence, the Lord of the Sacrifice.
\par On yet another line of approach the seeker meets another corresponding but in aspect distinct Duality in
which the biune
Page 123

character is more immediately apparent,—the dynamic Duality of Ishwara-Shakti. On one side he is aware of an
infinite and self-existent Godhead in being who contains all things in an ineffable potentiality of existence, a Self
of all selves, a Soul of all souls, a spiritual Substance of all substances, an impersonal inexpressible Existence, but
at the same time an illimitable Person who is here self-represented in numberless personality, a Master of
Knowledge, a Master of Forces, a Lord of love and bliss and beauty, a single Origin of the worlds, a
self-manifester and self-creator, a Cosmic Spirit, a universal Mind, a universal Life, the conscious and living
Reality supporting the appearance which we sense as unconscious inanimate Matter. On the other side he
becomes aware of the same Godhead in effectuating consciousness and power put forth as a self-aware Force
that contains and carries all within her and is charged to manifest it in universal Time and Space. It is evident to
him that here there is one supreme and infinite Being represented to us in two different sides of itself, obverse
and reverse in relation to each other. All is either prepared or pre-existent in the Godhead in Being and issues
from it and is upheld by its Will and Presence; all is brought out, carried in movement by the Godhead in power;
all becomes and acts and develops by her and in her its individual or its cosmic purpose. It is again a Duality
necessary for the manifestation, creating and enabling that double current of energy which seems always
necessary for the world-workings, two poles of the same Being, but here closer to each other and always very
evidently carrying each the powers of the other in its essence and its dynamic nature. At the same time by the
fact that the two great elements of the divine Mystery, the Personal and the Impersonal, are here fused together,
the seeker of the integral Truth feels in the duality of Ishwara-Shakti his closeness to a more intimate and
ultimate secret of the divine Transcendence and the Manifestation than that offered to him by any other
experience.
\par For the Ishwari Shakti, divine Conscious-Force and World-Mother, becomes a mediatrix between the eternal
One and the manifested Many. On one side, by the play of the energies which she brings from the One, she
manifests the multiple Divine in the
Page 124

universe, involving and evolving its endless appearances out of her revealing substance; on the other by the
reascending current of the same energies she leads back all towards That from which they have issued so that
the soul in its evolutionary manifestation may more and more return towards the Divinity there or here put on its
divine character. There is not in her, although she devises a cosmic mechanism, the character of an inconscient
mechanical Executrix which we find in the first physiognomy of Prakriti, the Nature-Force; neither is there that
sense of an Unreality, creatrix of illusions or semi-illusions, which is attached to our first view of Maya. It is at
once clear to the experiencing soul that here is a conscious Power of one substance and nature with the
Supreme from whom she came. If she seems to have plunged us into the Ignorance and Inconscience in
pursuance of a plan we cannot yet interpret, if her forces present themselves as all these ambiguous forces of
the universe, yet it becomes visible before long that she is working for the development of the Divine
Consciousness in us and that she stands above drawing us to her own higher entity, revealing to us more and
more the very essence of the Divine Knowledge, Will and Ananda. Even in the movements of the Ignorance the
soul of the seeker becomes aware of her conscious guidance supporting his steps and leading them slowly or
swiftly, straight or by many detours out of the darkness into the light of a greater consciousness, out of mortality
into immortality, out of evil and suffering towards a highest good and felicity of which as yet his human mind can
form only a faint image. Thus her power is at once liberative and dynamic, creative, effective,—creative not only
of things as they are, but of things that are to be; for, eliminating the twisted and tangled movements of his lower
consciousness made of the stuff of the Ignorance, it rebuilds and new-makes his soul and nature into the
substance and forces of a higher divine Nature.
\par In this Duality too there is possible a separative experience. At one pole of it the seeker may be conscious
only of the Master of Existence putting forth on him His energies of knowledge, power and bliss to liberate and
divinise; the Shakti may appear to him only an impersonal Force expressive of these things or
Page 125

an attribute of the Ishwara. At the other pole he may encounter the World-Mother, creatrix of the universe,
putting forth the Gods and the worlds and all things and existences out of her spirit-substance. Or even if he sees
both aspects, it may be with an unequal separating vision, subordinating one to the other, regarding the Shakti
only as a means for approaching the Ishwara. There results a one-sided tendency or a lack of balance, a power
of effectuation not perfectly supported or a light of revelation not perfectly dynamic. It is when a complete union
of the two sides of the Duality is effected and rules his consciousness that he begins to open to a fuller power
that will draw him altogether out of the confused clash of Ideas and Forces here into a higher Truth and enable
the descent of that Truth to illumine and deliver and act sovereignly upon this world of Ignorance. He has begun
to lay his hand on the integral secret which in its fullness can be grasped only when he overpasses the double
term that reigns here of Knowledge inextricably intertwined with an original Ignorance and crosses the border
where spiritual mind disappears into supramental Gnosis. It is through this third and most dynamic dual aspect of
the One that the seeker begins with the most integral completeness to enter into the deepest secret of the being
of the Lord of the Sacrifice.
\par For it is behind the mystery of the presence of personality in an apparently impersonal universe—as in that
of consciousness manifesting out of the Inconscient, life out of the inanimate, soul out of brute Matter—that is
hidden the solution of the riddle of existence. Here again is another dynamic Duality more pervading than
appears at first view and deeply necessary to the play of the slowly self-revealing Power. It is possible for the
seeker in his spiritual experience, standing at one pole of the Duality, to follow Mind in seeing a fundamental
Impersonality everywhere. The evolving soul in the material world begins from a vast impersonal Inconscience in
which our inner sight yet perceives the presence of a veiled infinite Spirit; it proceeds with the emergence of a
precarious consciousness and personality that even at their fullest have the look of an episode, but an episode
that repeats itself in a constant series; it arises through \NH experience
Page 126

of life out of mind into an infinite, impersonal and absolute Superconscience in which personality,
mind-consciousness, life-consciousness seem all to disappear by a liberating annihilation, Nirvana. At a lower
pitch he still experiences this fundamental impersonality as an immense liberating force everywhere. It releases
his knowledge from the narrowness of personal mind, his will from the clutch of personal desire, his heart from
the bondage of petty mutable emotions, his life from its petty personal groove, his soul from ego, and it allows
them to embrace calm, equality, wideness, universality, infinity. A Yoga of works would seem to require
Personality as its mainstay, almost its source, but here too the impersonal is found to be the most direct liberating
force; it is through a wide egoless impersonality that one can become a free worker and a divine creator. It is not
surprising that the overwhelming power of this experience from the impersonal pole of the Duality should have
moved the sages to declare this to be the one way and an impersonal Superconscience to be the sole truth of the
Eternal.
\par But still to the seeker standing at the opposite pole of the Duality another line of experience appears which
justifies an intuition deeply-seated behind the heart and in our very life-force, that personality, like consciousness,
life, soul, is not a brief-lived stranger in an impersonal Eternity, but contains the very meaning of existence. This
fine flower of the cosmic \NH Energy carries in it a forecast of the aim and a hint of the very \NH motive of the
universal labour. As an occult vision opens in him, he becomes aware of worlds behind in which consciousness
and personality hold an enormous place and assume a premier value; even here in the material world to this
occult vision the inconscience of Matter fills with a secret pervading consciousness, its inanimation harbours a
vibrant life, its mechanism is the device of an indwelling Intelligence, God and soul are \NH everywhere. Above
all stands an infinite conscious Being who is variously self-expressed in all these worlds; impersonality is only a
first means of that expression. It is a field of principles and forces, an equal basis of manifestation; but these
forces express themselves through beings, have conscious spirits at their head and are
Page 127

the emanation of a One Conscious Being who is their source. A multiple innumerable personality expressing that
One is the very sense and central aim of the manifestation and if now personality seems to be narrow,
fragmentary, restrictive, it is only because it has not opened to its source or flowered into its own divine truth and
fullness packing itself with the universal and the infinite. Thus the world-creation is no more an illusion, a
fortuitous mechanism, a play that need not have happened, a flux without consequence; it is an intimate
dynamism of the conscious and living Eternal.
\par This extreme opposition of view from the two poles of one Existence creates no fundamental difficulty for
the seeker of the integral Yoga; for his whole experience has shown him the necessity of these double terms and
their currents of Energy, negative and positive in relation to each other, for the manifestation of what is within the
one Existence. For himself Personality and Impersonality have been the two wings of his spiritual ascension and
he has the prevision that he will reach a height where their helpful interaction will pass into a fusion of their
powers and disclose the integral Reality and release into action the original force of the Divine. Not only in the
fundamental Aspects but in all the working of his sadhana he has felt their double truth and mutually
complementary working. An impersonal Presence has dominated from above or penetrated and occupied his
nature; a Light descending has suffused his mind, life-power, the very cells of his body, illumined them with
knowledge, revealed him to himself down to his most disguised and unsuspected movements, exposing, purifying,
destroying or brilliantly changing all that belonged to the Ignorance. A Force has poured into him in currents or
like a sea, worked in his being and all its members, dissolved, new-made, reshaped, transfigured everywhere. A
Bliss has invaded him and shown that it can make suffering and sorrow impossible and turn pain itself into divine
pleasure. A Love without limits has joined him to all creatures or revealed to him a world of inseparable intimacy
and unspeakable sweetness and beauty and begun to impose its law of perfection and its ecstasy even amidst the
disharmony of terrestrial life. A spiritual
Page 128

Truth and Right have convicted the good and evil of this world of imperfection or of falsehood and unveiled a
supreme good and its clue of subtle harmony and its sublimation of action and feeling and knowledge. But behind
all these and in them he has felt a Divinity who is all these things, a Bringer of Light, a Guide and All-Knower, a
Master of Force, a Giver of Bliss, Friend, Helper, Father, Mother, Playmate in the world-game, an absolute
Master of his being, his soul's Beloved and Lover. All relations known to human personality are there in the
soul's contact with the Divine; but they rise towards superhuman levels and compel him towards a divine nature.
\par It is an integral knowledge that is being sought, an integral force, a total amplitude of union with the All and
Infinite behind existence. For the seeker of the integral Yoga no single experience, no one Divine
Aspect,—however overwhelming to the human mind, sufficient for its capacity, easily accepted as the sole or the
ultimate reality,—can figure as the exclusive truth of the Eternal. For him the experience of the Divine Oneness
carried to its extreme is more deeply embraced and amply fathomed by following out to the full the experience of
the Divine Multiplicity. All that is true behind polytheism as well as behind monotheism falls within the scope of
his seeking; but he passes beyond their superficial sense to human mind to grasp their mystic truth in the Divine.
He sees what is aimed at by the jarring sects and philosophies and accepts each facet of the Reality in its own
place, but rejects their narrownesses and errors and proceeds farther till he discovers the One Truth that binds
them together. The reproach of anthropomorphism and anthropolatry cannot deter him,—for he sees them to be
prejudices of the ignorant and arrogant reasoning intelligence, the abstracting mind turning on itself in its own
cramped circle. If human relations as practised now by man are full of smallness and perversity and ignorance,
yet are they disfigured shadows of something in the Divine and by turning them to the Divine he finds that of
which they are a shadow and brings it down for manifestation in life. It is through the human exceeding itself and
opening itself to a supreme plenitude that the Divine must manifest itself here, since
Page 129

that comes inevitably in the course and process of the spiritual evolution, and therefore he will not despise or
blind himself to the Godhead because it is lodged in a human body, \s{m\=anu\,s\=i\.m tanum \=a\'sritam}. Beyond the
limited human conception of God, he will pass to the one divine Eternal, but also he will meet him in the faces of
the Gods, his cosmic personalities supporting the World-Play, detect him behind the mask of the Vibhutis,
embodied World-Forces or human Leaders, reverence and obey him in the Guru, worship him in the Avatar. This
will be to him his exceeding good fortune if he can meet one who has realised or is becoming That which he
seeks for and can by opening to it in this vessel of its manifestation himself realise it. For that is the most palpable
sign of the growing fulfilment, the promise of the great mystery of the progressive Descent into Matter which is
the secret sense of the material creation and the justification of terrestrial existence.
\par Thus reveals himself to the seeker in the progress of the sacrifice the Lord of the sacrifice. At any point this
revelation can begin; in any aspect the Master of the Work can take up the work in him and more and more
press upon him and it for the unfolding of his presence. In time all the Aspects disclose themselves, separate,
combine, fuse, are unified together. At the end there shines through it all the supreme integral Reality,
unknowable to Mind which is part of the Ignorance, but knowable because self-aware in the light of a spiritual
consciousness and a supramental knowledge.
\par
\tstar
\par This revelation of a highest Truth or a highest Being, Consciousness, Power, Bliss and Love, impersonal and
personal at once and so taking up both sides of our own being,—since in us also is the ambiguous meeting of a
Person and a mass of impersonal principles and forces,—is at once the first aim and the condition of the ultimate
achievement of the sacrifice. The achievement itself takes the shape of a union of our own existence with That
which is thus made manifest to our vision and experience, and
Page 130

the union has a threefold character. There is a union in spiritual essence, by identity; there is a union by the
indwelling of our soul in this highest Being and Consciousness; there is a dynamic union of likeness or oneness of
nature between That and our instrumental being here. The first is the liberation from the Ignorance and
identification with the Real and Eternal, \s{mok\,sa}, \s{s\=ayujya}, which is the characteristic aim of the Yoga of
Knowledge. The second, the dwelling of the soul with or in the Divine, \s{s\=am\=ipya}, \s{s\=alokya}, is the intense
hope of all Yoga of love and beatitude. The third, identity in nature, likeness to the Divine, to be perfect as That
is perfect, is the high intention of all Yoga of power and perfection or of divine works and service. The combined
completeness of the three together, founded here on a multiple Unity of the self-manifesting Divine, is the
complete result of the integral Yoga, the goal of its triple Path and the fruit of its triple sacrifice.
\par A union by identity may be ours, a liberation and change of our substance of being into that supreme
Spirit-substance, of our consciousness into that divine Consciousness, of our soul-state into that ecstasy of
spiritual beatitude or that calm eternal bliss of existence. A luminous indwelling in the Divine can be attained by
us secure against any fall or exile into this lower consciousness of the darkness and the Ignorance, the soul
ranging freely and firmly in its own natural world of light and joy and freedom and oneness. And since this is not
merely to be attained in some other existence beyond but pursued and discovered here also, it can only be by a
descent, by a bringing down of the Divine Truth, by the establishment here of the soul's native world of light, joy,
freedom, oneness. A union of our instrumental being no less than of our soul and spirit must change our
imperfect nature into the very likeness and image of Divine Nature; it must put off the blind, marred, mutilated,
discordant movements of the Ignorance and put on the inherence of that light, peace, bliss, harmony, universality,
mastery, purity, perfection; it must convert itself into a receptacle of divine knowledge, an instrument of divine
Will-Power and Force of Being, a channel of divine Love, Joy and Beauty. This is the transformation to be
effected,
Page 131

an integral transformation of all that we now are or seem to be, by the joining—Yoga—of the finite being in
Time with the Eternal and Infinite.
\par All this difficult result can become possible only if there is an immense conversion, a total reversal of our
consciousness, a supernormal entire transfiguration of the nature. There must be an ascension of the whole
being, an ascension of spirit chained here and trammelled by its instruments and its environment to sheer Spirit
free above, an ascension of soul towards some blissful Super-soul, an ascension of mind towards some luminous
Supermind, an ascension of life towards some vast Super-life, an ascension of our very physicality to join its
origin in some pure and plastic spirit-substance. And this cannot be a single swift upsoaring but, like the ascent of
the sacrifice described in the Veda, a climbing from peak to peak in which from each summit one looks up to the
much more that has still to be done. At the same time there must be a descent too to affirm below what we have
gained above: on each height we conquer we have to turn to bring down its power and its illumination into the
lower mortal movement; the discovery of the Light for ever radiant on high must correspond with the release of
the same Light secret below in every part down to the deepest caves of subconscient Nature. And this
pilgrimage of ascension and this descent for the labour of transformation must be inevitably a battle, a long war
with ourselves and with opposing forces around us which, while it lasts, may well seem interminable. For all our
old obscure and ignorant nature will contend repeatedly and obstinately with the transforming Influence,
supported in its lagging unwillingness or its stark resistance by most of the established forces of environing
universal Nature; the powers and principalities and the ruling beings of the Ignorance will not easily give up their
empire.
\par At first there may have to be a prolonged, often tedious and painful period of preparation and purification of
all our being till it is ready and fit for an opening to a greater Truth and Light or to the Divine Influence and
Presence. Even when centrally fitted, prepared, open already, it will still be long before
Page 132

all our movements of mind, life and body, all the multiple and conflicting members and elements of our personality
consent or, consenting, are able to bear the difficult and exacting process of the transformation. And hardest of
all, even if all in us is willing, is the struggle we shall have to carry through against the universal forces attached
to the present unstable creation when we seek to make the final supramental conversion and reversal of
consciousness by which the Divine Truth must be established in us in its plenitude and not merely what they
would more readily permit, an illumined Ignorance.
\par It is for this that a surrender and submission to That which is beyond us enabling the full and free working of
its Power is indispensable. As that self-giving progresses, the work of the sacrifice becomes easier and more
powerful and the prevention of the opposing Forces loses much of its strength, impulsion and substance. Two
inner changes help most to convert what now seems difficult or impracticable into a thing possible and even sure.
There takes place a coming to the front of some secret inmost soul within which was veiled by the restless
activity of the mind, by the turbulence of our vital impulses and by the obscurity of the physical consciousness,
the three powers which in their confused combination we now call our self. There will come about as a result a
less impeded growth of a Divine Presence at the centre with its liberating Light and effective Force and an
irradiation of it into all the conscious and subconscious ranges of our nature. These are the two signs, one
marking our completed conversion and consecration to the great Quest, the other the final acceptance by the
Divine of our sacrifice.
Page 133

\par
\hn Chapter V
\par
\ht The Ascent of the Sacrifice--1; The Works of Knowledge---The Psychic Being
\par\drop This then is in its foundations the integral knowledge of the Supreme and Infinite to whom we offer our
sacrifice, and this the nature of the sacrifice itself in its triple character,—a sacrifice of works, a sacrifice of love
and adoration, a sacrifice of knowledge. For even when we speak of the sacrifice of works by itself, we do not
mean the offering only of our outward acts, but of all that is active and dynamic in us; our internal movements no
less than our external doings are to be consecrated on the one altar. The inner heart of all work that is made into
a sacrifice is a labour of self-discipline and self-perfection by which we can hope to become conscious and
luminous with a Light from above poured into all our movements of mind, heart, will, sense, life and body. An
increasing light of divine consciousness will make us close in soul and one by identity in our inmost being and
spiritual substance with the Master of the world-sacrifice,—the supreme object of existence proposed by the
ancient Vedanta; but also it will tend to make us one in our becoming by resemblance to the Divine in our nature,
the mystic sense of the symbol of sacrifice in the sealed speech of the seers of the Veda.
\par But if this is to be the character of the rapid evolution from a mental to a spiritual being contemplated by the
integral Yoga, a question arises full of many perplexities but of great dynamic importance. How are we to deal
with life and works as they now are, with the activities proper to our still unchanged human nature? An
ascension towards a greater consciousness, an occupation of our mind, life and body by its powers has been
accepted as the outstanding object of the Yoga: but still life here, not some other-life elsewhere, is proposed as
the immediate field of
Page 134

the action of the Spirit,—a transformation, not an \NH annihilation of our instrumental being and nature. What
then becomes of the present activities of our being, activities of the mind turned towards knowledge and the
expression of knowledge, activities of our emotional and sensational parts, activities of outward conduct, creation,
production, the will turned towards mastery over men, things, life, the world, the forces of Nature? Are they to
be abandoned and to be replaced by some other way of living in which a spiritualised consciousness can find its
true expression and figure? Are they to be maintained as they are in their outward appearance, but transformed
by an inner spirit in the act or enlarged in scope and liberated into new forms by a reversal of consciousness such
as was seen on earth when man took up the vital activities of the animal to mentalise and extend and transfigure
them by the infusion of reason, thinking will, refined emotion, an organised intelligence? Or is there to be an
abandonment in part, a preservation only of such of them as can bear a spiritual change and, for the rest, the
creation of a new life expressive, in its form no less than in its inspiration and motive-force, of the unity,
wideness, peace, joy and harmony of the liberated spirit? It is this problem most of all that has exercised the
minds of those who have tried to trace the paths that lead from the human to the Divine in the long journey of the
Yoga.
\par Every kind of solution has been offered from the entire abandonment of works and life, so far as that is
physically possible, to the acceptance of life as it is but with a new spirit animating and uplifting its movements, in
appearance the same as they were but changed in the spirit behind them and therefore in their inner significance.
The extreme solution insisted on by the world-shunning ascetic or the inward-turned ecstatical and self-oblivious
mystic is evidently foreign to the purpose of an integral Yoga,—for if we are to realise the Divine in the world, it
cannot be done by leaving aside the world-action and action itself altogether. At a less high pitch it was laid down
by the religious mind in ancient times that one should keep only such actions as are in their nature part of the
seeking, service or cult
Page 135

of the Divine and such others as are attached to these or, in addition, those that are indispensable to the ordinary
setting of life but done in a religious spirit and according to the injunctions of traditional religion and Scripture. But
this is too formalist a rule for the fulfilment of the free spirit in works, and it is besides professedly no more than
a provisional solution for tiding over the transition from life in the world to a life in the Beyond which still remains
the sole ultimate purpose. An integral Yoga must lean rather to the catholic injunction of the Gita that even the
liberated soul, living in the Truth, should still do all the works of life so that the plan of the universal evolution
under a secret divine leading may not languish or suffer. But if all works are to be done with the same forms and
on the same lines as they are now done in the Ignorance, our gain is only inward and our life is in danger of
becoming the dubious and ambiguous formula of an inner Light doing the works of an outer Twilight, the perfect
Spirit expressing itself in a mould of imperfection foreign to its own divine nature. If no better can be done for a
time,—and during a long period of transition something like this does inevitably happen,—then so it must remain
till things are ready and the spirit within is powerful enough to impose its own forms on the life of the body and
the world outside; but this can be accepted only as a transitional stage and not as our soul's ideal or the ultimate
goal of the passage.
\par For the same reason the ethical solution is insufficient; for an ethical rule merely puts a bit in the mouth of
the wild horses of Nature and exercises over them a difficult and partial control, but it has no power to transform
Nature so that she may move in a secure freedom fulfilling the intuitions that proceed from a divine
self-knowledge. At best its method is to lay down limits, to coerce the devil, to put the wall of a relative and very
doubtful safety around us. This or some similar device of self-protection may be necessary for a time whether in
ordinary life or in Yoga; but in Yoga it can only be the mark of a transition. A fundamental transformation and a
pure wideness of spiritual life are the aim before us and, if we are to reach it, we must find a deeper solution, a
surer supra-ethical dynamic principle. To be spiritual
Page 136

within, ethical in the outside life, this is the ordinary religious solution, but it is a compromise; the spiritualisation of
both the inward being and the outward life and not a compromise between life and the spirit is the goal of which
we are the seekers. Nor can the human confusion of values which obliterates the distinction between spiritual
and moral and even claims that the moral is the only true spiritual element in our nature be of any use to us; for
ethics is a mental control, and the limited erring mind is not and cannot be the free and ever-luminous spirit. It is
equally impossible to accept the gospel that makes life the one aim, takes its elements fundamentally as they are
and only calls in a half-spiritual or pseudo-spiritual light to flush and embellish it. Inadequate too is the very
frequent attempt at a misalliance between the vital and the spiritual, a mystic experience within with an
aestheticised intellectual and sensuous Paganism or exalted hedonism outside leaning upon it and satisfying itself
in the glow of a spiritual sanction; for this too is a precarious and never successful compromise and it is as far
from the divine Truth and its integrality as the puritanic opposite. These are all stumbling solutions of the fallible
human mind groping for a transaction between the high spiritual summits and the lower pitch of the ordinary
mind-motives and life-motives. Whatever partial truth may be hidden behind them, that truth can only be
accepted when it has been raised to the spiritual level, tested in the supreme Truth-consciousness and extricated
from the soil and error of the Ignorance.
\par In sum, it may be safely affirmed that no solution offered can be anything but provisional until a supramental
Truth-consciousness is reached by which the appearances of things are put in their place and their essence
revealed and that in them which derives straight from the spiritual essence. In the meanwhile our only safety is to
find a guiding law of spiritual experience—or else to liberate a light within that can lead us on the way until that
greater direct Truth-consciousness is reached above us or born within us. For all else in us that is only outward,
all that is not a spiritual sense or seeing, the constructions, representations or conclusions of the intellect, the
suggestions or
Page 137

instigations of the life-force, the positive necessities of physical things are sometimes half-lights, sometimes false
lights that can at best only serve for a while or serve a little and for the rest either detain or confuse us. The
guiding law of spiritual experience can only come by an opening of human consciousness to the Divine
Consciousness; there must be the power to receive in us the working and command and dynamic presence of the
Divine Shakti and surrender ourselves to her control; it is that surrender and that control which bring the
guidance. But the surrender is not sure, there is no absolute certitude of the guidance so long as we are besieged
by mind formations and life impulses and instigations of ego which may easily betray us into the hands of a false
experience. This danger can only be countered by the opening of a now nine-tenths concealed inmost soul or
psychic being that is already there but not commonly active within us. That is the inner light we must liberate; for
the light of this inmost soul is our one sure illumination so long as we walk still amidst the siege of the Ignorance
and the Truth-consciousness has not taken up the entire control of our Godward endeavour. The working of the
Divine Force in us under the conditions of the transition and the light of the psychic being turning us always
towards a conscious and seeing obedience to that higher impulsion and away from the demands and instigations
of the Forces of the Ignorance, these between them create an ever progressive inner law of our action which
continues till the spiritual and supramental can be established in our nature. In the transition there may well be a
period in which we take up all life and action and offer them to the Divine for purification, change and
deliverance of the truth within them, another period in which we draw back and build a spiritual wall around us
admitting through its gates only such activities as consent to undergo the law of the spiritual transformation, a
third in which a free and all-embracing action, but with new forms fit for the utter truth of the Spirit, can again be
made possible. These things, however, will be decided by no mental rule but in the light of the soul within us and
by the ordaining force and progressive guidance of the Divine Power that secretly or overtly first impels, then
Page 138

begins clearly to control and order and finally takes up the whole burden of the Yoga.
\par In accordance with the triple character of the sacrifice we may divide works too into a triple order, the
works of Knowledge, the works of Love, the works of the Will-in-Life, and see how this more plastic spiritual
rule applies to each province and effects the transition from the lower to the higher nature.
\par
\tstar
\par It is natural from the point of view of the Yoga to divide into two categories the activities of the human mind
in its pursuit of knowledge. There is the supreme supra-intellectual knowledge which concentrates itself on the
discovery of the One and Infinite in its transcendence or tries to penetrate by intuition, contemplation, direct inner
contact into the ultimate truths behind the appearances of Nature; there is the lower science which diffuses itself
in an outward knowledge of phenomena, the disguises of the One and Infinite as it appears to us in or through the
more exterior forms of the world-manifestation around us. These two, an upper and a lower hemisphere, in the
form of them constructed or conceived by men within the mind's ignorant limits, have even there separated
themselves, as they developed, with some sharpness.\dots   Philosophy, sometimes spiritual or at least intuitive,
sometimes abstract and intellectual, sometimes intellectualising spiritual experience or supporting with a logical
apparatus the discoveries of the spirit, has claimed always to take the fixation of ultimate Truth as its province.
But even when it did not separate itself on rarefied metaphysical heights from the knowledge that belongs to the
practical world and the pursuit of ephemeral objects, intellectual Philosophy by its habit of abstraction has seldom
been a power for life. It has been sometimes powerful for high speculation, pursuing mental Truth for its own
sake without any ulterior utility or object, sometimes for a subtle gymnastic of the mind in a mistily bright
cloud-land of words and ideas, but it has walked or acrobatised far from the more tangible realities of existence.
Ancient
Page 139

Philosophy in Europe was more dynamic, but only for the few; in India in its more spiritualised forms, it strongly
influenced but without transforming the life of the race.\dots   Religion did not attempt, like Philosophy, to live
alone on the heights; its aim was rather to take hold of man's parts of life even more than his parts of mind and
draw them Godwards; it professed to build a bridge between spiritual Truth and the vital and material human
existence; it strove to subordinate and reconcile the lower to the higher, make life serviceable to God, Earth
obedient to Heaven. It has to be admitted that too often this necessary effort had the opposite result of making
Heaven a sanction for Earth's desires; for, continually, the religious idea has been turned into an excuse for the
worship and service of the human ego. Religion, leaving constantly its little shining core of spiritual experience,
has lost itself in the obscure mass of its ever extending ambiguous compromises with life: in attempting to satisfy
the thinking mind, it more often succeeded in oppressing or fettering it with a mass of theological dogmas; while
seeking to net the human heart, it fell itself into pits of pietistic emotionalism and sensationalism; in the act of
annexing the vital nature of man to dominate it, it grew itself vitiated and fell a prey to all the fanaticism,
homicidal fury, savage or harsh turn for oppression, pullulating falsehood, obstinate attachment to ignorance to
which that vital nature is prone; its desire to draw the physical in man towards God betrayed it into chaining itself
to ecclesiastic mechanism, hollow ceremony and lifeless ritual. The corruption of the best produced the worst by
that strange chemistry of the power of life which generates evil out of good even as it can also generate good out
of evil. At the same time in a vain effort at self-defence against this downward gravitation, Religion was driven
to cut existence into two by a division of knowledge, works, art, life itself into two opposite categories, the
spiritual and the worldly, religious and mundane, sacred and profane; but this defensive distinction itself became
conventional and artificial and aggravated rather than healed the disease.\dots   On their side Science and Art
and the knowledge of Life, although at first they served or lived in the shadow of Religion, ended by
emancipating themselves, became
Page 140

estranged or hostile, or have even recoiled with indifference, contempt or scepticism from what seem to them the
cold, barren and distant or unsubstantial and illusory heights of unreality to which metaphysical Philosophy and
Religion aspire. For a time the divorce has been as complete as the one-sided intolerance of the human mind
could make it and threatened even to end in a complete extinction of all attempt at a higher or a more spiritual
knowledge. Yet even in the earthward life a higher knowledge is indeed the one thing that is throughout needful,
and without it the lower sciences and pursuits, however fruitful, however rich, free, miraculous in the abundance
of their results, become easily a sacrifice offered without due order and to false gods; corrupting, hardening in
the end the heart of man, limiting his mind's horizons, they confine in a stony material imprisonment or lead to a
final baffling incertitude and disillusionment. A sterile agnosticism awaits us above the brilliant phosphorescence
of a half-knowledge that is still the Ignorance.
\par A Yoga turned towards an all-embracing realisation of the Supreme will not despise the works or even the
dreams, if dreams they are, of the Cosmic Spirit or shrink from the splendid toil and many-sided victory which he
has assigned to himself in the human creature. But its first condition for this liberality is that our works in the
world too must be part of the sacrifice offered to the Highest and to none else, to the Divine Shakti and to no
other Power, in the right spirit and with the right knowledge, by the free soul and not by the hypnotised bondslave
of material Nature. If a division of works has to be made, it is between those that are nearest to the heart of the
sacred flame and those that are least touched or illumined by it because they are more at a distance, or between
the fuel that burns strongly and brightly and the logs that if too thickly heaped on the altar may impede the ardour
of the fire by their rather damp, heavy and diffused abundance. But, otherwise, apart from this division, all
activities of knowledge that seek after or express Truth are in themselves rightful materials for a complete
offering; none ought necessarily to be excluded from the wide framework of the divine life. The mental and
physical sciences which examine into the laws and
Page 141

forms and processes of things, those which concern the life of men and animals, the social, political, linguistic and
historical and those which seek to know and control the labours and activities by which man subdues and utilises
his world and environment, and the noble and beautiful Arts which are at once work and knowledge,—for every
well-made and significant poem, picture, statue or building is an act of creative knowledge, a living discovery of
the consciousness, a figure of Truth, a dynamic form of mental and vital self-expression or
world-expression,—all that seeks, all that finds, all that voices or figures is a realisation of something of the play
of the Infinite and to that extent can be made a means of God-realisation or of divine formation. But the Yogin
has to see that it is no longer done as part of an ignorant mental life; it can be accepted by him only if by the
feeling, the remembrance, the dedication within it, it is turned into a movement of the spiritual consciousness and
becomes a part of its vast grasp of comprehensive illuminating knowledge.
\par For all must be done as a sacrifice, all activities must have the One Divine for their object and the heart of
their \NH meaning. The Yogin's aim in the sciences that make for knowledge should be to discover and
understand the workings of the Divine Consciousness-Puissance in man and creatures and things and forces, her
creative significances, her execution of the mysteries, the symbols in which she arranges the manifestation. The
Yogin's aim in the practical sciences, whether mental and physical or occult and psychic, should be to enter into
the ways of the Divine and his processes, to know the materials and means for the work given to us so that we
may use that knowledge for a conscious and faultless expression of the spirit's mastery, joy and self-fulfilment.
The Yogin's aim in the Arts should not be a mere aesthetic, mental or vital gratification, but, seeing the Divine
everywhere, worshipping it with a revelation of the meaning of its own works, to express that One Divine in ideal
forms, the One Divine in principles and forces, the One Divine in gods and men and creatures and objects. The
theory that sees an intimate connection between religious aspiration and the truest and greatest Art is in essence
right; but we must
Page 142

substitute for the mixed and doubtful religious motive a spiritual aspiration, vision, interpreting experience. For the
wider and more comprehensive the seeing, the more it contains in itself the sense of the hidden Divine in
humanity and in all things and rises beyond a superficial religiosity into the spiritual life, the more luminous,
flexible, deep and powerful will the Art be that springs from that high motive. The Yogin's distinction from other
men is this that he lives in a higher and vaster spiritual consciousness; all his work of knowledge or creation must
then spring from there: it must not be made in the mind,—for it is a greater truth and vision than mental man's
that he has to express or rather that presses to express itself through him and mould his works, not for his
personal satisfaction, but for a divine purpose.
\par At the same time the Yogin who knows the Supreme is not subject to any need or compulsion in these
activities; for to him they are neither a duty nor a necessary occupation for the mind nor a high amusement, nor
imposed even by the loftiest human purpose. He is not attached, bound and limited by any nor has he any
personal motive of fame, greatness or personal satisfaction in these works; he can leave or pursue them as the
Divine in him wills, but he need not otherwise abandon them in his pursuit of the higher integral knowledge. He
will do these things just as the supreme Power acts and creates, for a certain spiritual joy in creation and
expression or to help in the holding together and right ordering or leading of this world of God's workings. The
Gita teaches that the man of knowledge shall by his way of life give to those who have not yet the spiritual
consciousness, the love and habit of {\it all} works and not only of actions recognised as pious, religious or
ascetic in their character; he should not draw men away from the world-action by his example. For the world
must proceed in its great upward aspiring; men and nations must not be led to fall away from even an ignorant
activity into a worse ignorance of inaction or to sink down into that miserable disintegration and tendency of
dissolution which comes upon communities and peoples when there predominates the tamasic principle, the
principle whether of obscure confusion and error
Page 143

or of weariness and inertia. “For I too,” says the Lord in the Gita, “have no need to do works, since there is
nothing I have not or must yet gain for myself; yet I do works in the world: for if I did not do works, all laws
would fall into confusion, the worlds would sink towards chaos and I would be the destroyer of these peoples.”
The spiritual life does not need, for its purity, to destroy interest in all things except the Inexpressible or to cut at
the roots of the Sciences, the Arts and Life. It may well be one of the effects of an integral spiritual knowledge
and activity to lift them out of their limitations, substitute for our mind's ignorant, limited, tepid or trepidant
pleasure in them a free, intense and uplifting urge of delight and supply a new source of creative spiritual power
and illumination by which they can be carried more swiftly and profoundly towards their absolute light in
knowledge and their yet undreamed possibilities and most dynamic energy of content and form and practice. The
one thing needful must be pursued first and always; but all things else come with it as its outcome and have not
so much to be added to us as recovered and reshaped in its self-light and as portions of its self-expressive force.
\par
\tstar
\par This then is the true relation between divine and human knowledge; it is not a separation into disparate fields,
sacred and profane, that is the heart of the difference, but the character of the consciousness behind the
working. All is human knowledge that proceeds from the ordinary mental consciousness interested in the outside
or upper layers of things, in process, in phenomena for their own sake or for the sake of some surface utility or
mental or vital satisfaction of Desire or of the Intelligence. But the same activity of knowledge can become part
of the Yoga if it proceeds from the spiritual or spiritualising consciousness which seeks and finds in all that it
surveys or penetrates the presence of the timeless Eternal and the ways of manifestation of the Eternal in Time.
It is evident that the need of a concentration indispensable for the transition out of the Ignorance may make
Page 144

it necessary for the seeker to gather together his energies and focus them only on that which will help the
transition and to leave aside or subordinate for the time all that is not directly turned towards the one object. He
may find that this or that pursuit of human knowledge with which he was accustomed to deal by the surface
power of the mind still brings him by reason of this tendency or habit out of the depths to the surface or down
from the heights which he has climbed or is nearing to lower levels. These activities then may have to be
intermitted or put aside until, secure in a higher consciousness, he is able to turn its powers on all the mental
fields; then, subjected to that light or taken up into it, they are turned, by the transformation of his consciousness,
into a province of the spiritual and divine. All that cannot be so transformed or refuses to be part of a divine
consciousness he will abandon without hesitation, but not from any preconceived prejudgment of its unfitness or
its incapacity to be an element of the new inner life. There can be no fixed mental test or principle for these
things; he will therefore follow no unalterable rule, but accept or repel an activity of the mind according to his
feeling, insight or experience until the greater Power and Light are there to turn their unerring scrutiny on all that
is below and choose or reject their material out of what the human evolution has prepared for the divine labour.
\par How precisely or by what stages this progression and change will take place must depend on the form, need
and powers of the individual nature. In the spiritual domain the essence is always one, but there is yet an infinite
variety and, at any rate in the integral Yoga, the rigidity of a strict and precise mental rule is seldom applicable;
for, even when they walk in the same direction, no two natures proceed on exactly the same lines, in the same
series of steps or with quite identical stages of their progress. It may yet be said that a logical succession of the
states of progress would be very much in this order. First, there is a large turning in which all the natural mental
activities proper to the individual nature are taken up or referred to a higher standpoint and dedicated by the soul
in us, the psychic being, the priest of the sacrifice, to the divine service; next, there is an attempt at an ascent of
the being
Page 145

and a bringing down of the Light and Power proper to some new height of consciousness gained by its upward
effort into the whole action of the knowledge. Here there may be a strong concentration on the inward central
change of the consciousness and an abandonment of a large part of the outward-going mental life or else its
relegation to a small and subordinate place. At different stages it or parts of it may be taken up again from time
to time to see how far the new inner psychic and spiritual consciousness can be brought into its movements; but
that compulsion of the temperament or the nature which in human beings necessitates one kind of activity or
another and makes it seem almost an indispensable portion of the existence, will diminish and eventually no
attachment will be left, no lower compulsion or driving force felt anywhere. Only the Divine will matter, the
Divine alone will be the one need of the whole being; if there is any compulsion to activity it will be not that of
implanted desire or of force of Nature, but the luminous driving of some greater Consciousness-Force which is
becoming more and more the sole motive power of the whole existence. On the other hand, it is possible at any
period of the inner spiritual progress that one may experience an extension rather than a restriction of the
activities; there may be an opening of new capacities of mental creation and new provinces of knowledge by the
miraculous touch of the Yoga-Shakti. Aesthetic feeling, the power of artistic creation in one field or many fields
together, talent or genius of literary expression, a faculty of metaphysical thinking, any power of eye or ear or
hand or mind-power may awaken where none was apparent before. The Divine within may throw these latent
riches out from the depths in which they were hidden or a Force from above may pour down its energies to equip
the instrumental nature for the activity or the creation of which it is meant to be a channel or a builder. But,
whatever may be the method or the course of development chosen by the hidden Master of the Yoga, the
common culmination of this stage is the growing consciousness of him alone as the mover, decider, shaper of all
the movements of the mind and all the activities of knowledge.
Page 146

\par There are two signs of the transformation of the seeker's mind of knowledge and works of knowledge from
the process of the Ignorance to the process of a liberated consciousness working partly, then wholly in the light
of the Spirit. There is first a central change of the consciousness and a growing direct experience, vision, feeling
of the Supreme and the cosmic existence, the Divine in itself and the Divine in all things; the mind will be taken
up into a growing preoccupation with this first and foremost and will feel itself heightening, widening into a more
and more illumined means of expression of the one fundamental knowledge. But also the central Consciousness
in its turn will take up more and more the outer mental activities of knowledge and turn them into a parcel of
itself or an annexed province; it will infuse into them its more authentic movement and make a more and more
spiritualised and illumined mind its instrument in these surface fields, its new conquests, as well as in its own
deeper spiritual empire. And this will be the second sign, the sign of a certain completion and perfection, that the
Divine himself has become the Knower and all the inner movements, including the activities of what was once a
purely human mental action, have become his field of knowledge. There will be less and less individual choice,
opinion, preference, less and less of intellectualisation, mental weaving, cerebral galley-slave labour; a Light
within will see all that has to be seen, know all that has to be known, develop, create, organise. It will be the
Inner Knower who will do in the liberated and universalised mind of the individual the works of an
all-comprehending knowledge.
\par These two changes are the signs of a first effectuation in which the activities of the mental nature are lifted
up, spiritualised, widened, universalised, liberated, led to a consciousness of their true purpose as an
instrumentation of the Divine creating and developing its manifestation in the temporal universe. But this cannot
be the whole scope of the transformation; for it is not in these limits that the integral seeker can cease from his
ascension or confine the widening of his nature. For, if it were so, knowledge would still remain a working of the
mind, liberated, universalised, spiritualised, but still, as all mind must be,
Page 147

\NH comparatively restricted, relative, imperfect in the very essence of its dynamism; it would reflect luminously
great constructions of Truth, but not move in the domain where Truth is authentic, direct, sovereign and native.
There is an ascension still to be made from this height, by which the spiritualised mind will exceed itself and
transmute into a supramental power of knowledge. Already in the process of spiritualisation it will have begun to
pass out of the brilliant poverty of the human intellect; it will mount successively into the pure broad reaches of a
higher mind, and next into the gleaming belts of a still greater free Intelligence illumined with a Light from above.
At this point it will begin to feel more freely, admit with a less mixed response the radiant beginnings of an
Intuition, not illumined, but luminous in itself, true in itself, no longer entirely mental and therefore subjected to the
abundant intrusion of error. Here too is not an end, for it must rise beyond into the very domain of that
untruncated Intuition, the first direct light from the self-awareness of essential Being and, beyond it, attain that
from which this light comes. For there is an Overmind behind Mind, a Power more original and dynamic which
supports Mind, sees it as a diminished radiation from itself, uses it as a transmitting belt of passage downward or
an instrument for the creations of the Ignorance. The last step of the ascension would be the surpassing of
Overmind itself or its return into its own still greater origin, its conversion into the supramental light of the Divine
Gnosis. For there in the supramental Light is the seat of a divine Truth-consciousness that has native in it, as no
other consciousness below it can have, the power to organise the works of a Truth which is no longer tarnished
by the shadow of the cosmic Inconscience and Ignorance. There to reach and thence to bring down a
supramental dynamism that can transform the Ignorance is the distant but imperative supreme goal of the integral
Yoga.
\par As the light of each of these higher powers is turned upon the human activities of knowledge, any distinction
of sacred and profane, human and divine, begins more and more to fade until it is finally abolished as otiose; for
whatever is touched and thoroughly penetrated by the Divine Gnosis is transfigured
Page 148

and becomes a movement of its own Light and Power, free from the turbidity and limitations of the lower
intelligence. It is not a separation of some activities, but a transformation of them all by the change of the
informing consciousness that is the way of liberation, an ascent of the sacrifice of knowledge to a greater and
ever greater light and force. All the works of mind and intellect must be first heightened and widened, then
illumined, lifted into the domain of a higher Intelligence, afterwards translated into workings of a greater
non-mental Intuition, these again transformed into the dynamic outpourings of the Overmind radiance, and those
transfigured into the full light and sovereignty of the supramental Gnosis. It is this that the evolution of
consciousness in the world carries prefigured but latent in its seed and in the straining tense intention of its
process; nor can that process, that evolution cease till it has evolved the instruments of a perfect in place of its
now imperfect manifestation of the Spirit.
\par
\tstar
\par If knowledge is the widest power of the consciousness and its function is to free and illumine, yet love is the
deepest and most intense and its privilege is to be the key to the most profound and secret recesses of the Divine
Mystery. Man, because he is a mental being, is prone to give the highest importance to the thinking mind and its
reason and will and to its way of approach and effectuation of Truth and, even, he is inclined to hold that there is
no other. The heart with its emotions and incalculable movements is to the eye of his intellect an obscure,
uncertain and often a perilous and misleading power which needs to be kept in control by the reason and the
mental will and intelligence. And yet there is in the heart or behind it a profounder mystic light which, if not what
we call intuition,—for that, though not of the mind, yet descends through the mind,—has yet a direct touch upon
Truth and is nearer to the Divine than the human intellect in its pride of knowledge. According to the ancient
teaching the seat of the immanent Divine, the hidden Purusha, is in the mystic heart,—the secret heart-cave,
\s{h\,rdaye guh\=ay\=am},
Page 149

as the Upanishads put it,—and, according to the experience of many Yogins, it is from its depths that there
comes the voice or the breath of the inner oracle.
\par This ambiguity, these opposing appearances of depth and blindness are created by the double character of
the human emotive being. For there is in front in man a heart of vital emotion similar to the animal's, if more
variously developed; its emotions are governed by egoistic passion, blind instinctive affections and all the play of
the life-impulses with their imperfections, perversions, often sordid degradations,—a heart besieged and given
over to the lusts, desires, wraths, intense or fierce demands or little greeds and mean pettinesses of an obscure
and fallen life-force and debased by its slavery to any and every impulse. This mixture of the emotive heart and
the sensational hungering vital creates in man a false soul of desire; it is this that is the crude and dangerous
element which the reason rightly distrusts and feels a need to control, even though the actual control or rather
coercion it succeeds in establishing over our raw and insistent vital nature remains always very uncertain and
deceptive. But the true soul of man is not there; it is in the true invisible heart hidden in some luminous cave of
the nature: there under some infiltration of the divine Light is our soul, a silent inmost being of which few are
even aware; for if all have a soul, few are conscious of their true soul or feel its direct impulse. There dwells the
little spark of the Divine which supports the obscure mass of our nature and around it grows the psychic being,
the formed soul or the real Man within us. It is as this psychic being in him grows and the movements of the
heart reflect its divinations and impulsions that man becomes more and more aware of his soul, ceases to be a
superior animal and, awakening to glimpses of the godhead within him, admits more and more its intimations of a
deeper life and consciousness and an impulse towards things divine. It is one of the decisive moments of the
integral Yoga when this psychic being, liberated, brought out from the veil to the front, can pour the full flood of
its divinations, seeings and impulsions on the mind, life and body of man and begins to prepare the upbuilding of
divinity in the earthly nature.
Page 150

\par As in the works of knowledge, so in dealing with the workings of the heart, we are obliged to make a
preliminary distinction between two categories of movements, those that are either moved by the true soul or aid
towards its liberation and rule in the nature and those that are turned to the satisfaction of the unpurified vital
nature. But the distinctions ordinarily laid down in this sense are of little use for the deeper spiritual purpose of
Yoga. Thus a division can be made between religious emotions and mundane feelings and it can be laid down as
a rule of spiritual life that the religious emotions alone should be cultivated and all worldly feelings and passions
must be rejected and fall away from our existence. This in practice would mean the religious life of the saint or
devotee, alone within with the Divine or linked only to others in a common God-love or at the most pouring out
the fountains of a sacred, religious or pietistic love on the world outside. But religious emotion itself is too
constantly invaded by the turmoil and obscurity of the vital movements and it is often either crude or narrow or
fanatical or mixed with movements that are not signs of the spirit's perfection. It is evident besides that even at
the best an intense figure of sainthood clamped in rigid hieratic lines is quite other than the wide ideal of an
integral Yoga. A larger psychic and emotional relation with God and the world, more deep and plastic in its
essence, more wide and embracing in its movements, more capable of taking up in its sweep the whole of life, is
imperative.
\par A wider formula has been provided by the secular mind of man of which the basis is the ethical sense; for it
distinguishes between the emotions sanctioned by the ethical sense and those that are egoistic and selfishly
common and mundane. It is the works of altruism, philanthropy, compassion, benevolence, \NH humanitarianism,
service, labour for the well-being of man and all creatures that are to be our ideal; to shuffle off the coil of
egoism and grow into a soul of self-abnegation that lives only or mainly for others or for humanity as a whole is
the way of man's inner evolution according to this doctrine. Or if this is too secular and mental to satisfy the
whole of our being, since there is a deeper religious and spiritual note there that is left
Page 151

out of account by the humanitarian formula, a religio-ethical foundation can be provided for it—and such was
indeed its original basis. To the inner worship of the Divine or the Supreme by the devotion of the heart or to the
pursuit of the Ineffable by the seeking of a highest knowledge can be added a worship through altruistic works or
a preparation through acts of love, of benevolence, of service to mankind or to those around us. It is indeed by
the religio-ethical sense that the law of universal goodwill or universal compassion or of love and service to the
neighbour, the Vedantic, the Buddhistic, the Christian ideal, was created; only by a sort of secular refrigeration
extinguishing the fervour of the religious element in it could the humanitarian ideal disengage itself and become
the highest plane of a secular system of mental and moral ethics. For in the religious system this law of works is
a means that ceases when its object is accomplished or a side issue; it is a part of the cult by which one adores
and seeks the Divinity or it is a penultimate step of the excision of self in the passage to Nirvana. In the secular
ideal it is promoted into an object in itself; it becomes a sign of the moral perfection of the human being, or else it
is a condition for a happier state of man upon earth, a better society, a more united life of the race. But none of
these things satisfy the demand of the soul that is placed before us by the integral Yoga.
\par Altruism, philanthropy, humanitarianism, service are flowers of the mental consciousness and are at best the
mind's cold and pale imitation of the spiritual flame of universal Divine Love. Not truly liberative from ego-sense,
they widen it at most and give it a higher and larger satisfaction; impotent in practice to change man's vital life
and nature, they only modify and palliate its action and daub over its unchanged egoistic essence. Or if they are
intensely followed with an entire sincerity of the will, it is by an exaggerated amplification of one side of our
nature; in that exaggeration there can be no clue for the full and perfect divine evolution of the many sides of our
individualised being towards the universal and transcendent Eternal. Nor can the religio-ethical ideal be a
sufficient guide,—for this is a compromise or compact of mutual concessions for mutual
Page 152

support between a religious urge which seeks to get a closer hold on earth by taking into itself the higher turns of
ordinary human nature and an ethical urge which hopes to elevate itself out of its own mental hardness and
dryness by some touch of a religious fervour. In making this compact religion lowers itself to the mental level and
inherits the inherent imperfections of mind and its inability to convert and transform life. The mind is the sphere
of the dualities and, just as it is impossible for it to achieve any absolute Truth but only truths relative or mixed
with error, so it is impossible for it to achieve any absolute good; for moral good exists as a counterpart and
corrective to evil and has evil always for its shadow, complement, almost its reason for existence. But the
spiritual consciousness belongs to a higher than the mental plane and there the dualities cease; for there
falsehood confronted with the truth by which it profited through a usurping falsification of it and evil faced by the
good of which it was a perversion or a lurid substitute, are obliged to perish for want of sustenance and to cease.
The integral Yoga, refusing to rely upon the fragile stuff of mental and moral ideals, puts its whole emphasis in
this field on three central dynamic processes,—the development of the true soul or psychic being to take the
place of the false soul of desire, the sublimation of human into divine love, the elevation of consciousness from its
mental to its spiritual and supramental plane by whose power alone both the soul and the life-force can be utterly
delivered from the veils and prevarications of the Ignorance.
\par It is the very nature of the soul or the psychic being to turn towards the divine Truth as the sunflower to the
sun; it accepts and clings to all that is divine or progressing towards divinity, and draws back from all that is a
perversion or a denial of it, from all that is false and undivine. Yet the soul is at first but a spark and then a little
flame of godhead burning in the midst of a great darkness; for the most part it is veiled in its inner sanctum and to
reveal itself it has to call on the mind, the life-force and the physical consciousness and persuade them, as best
they can, to express it; ordinarily, it succeeds at most in suffusing their outwardness with its inner light and
modifying with its
Page 153

purifying fineness their dark obscurities or their coarser mixture. Even when there is a formed psychic being able
to express itself with some directness in life, it is still in all but a few a smaller portion of the being—“no bigger in
the mass of the body than the thumb of a man” was the image used by the ancient seers—and it is not always
able to prevail against the obscurity or ignorant smallness of the physical consciousness, the mistaken surenesses
of the mind or the arrogance and vehemence of the vital nature. This soul is obliged to accept the human mental,
emotive, sensational life as it is, its relations, its activities, its cherished forms and figures; it has to labour to
disengage and increase the divine element in all this relative truth mixed with a continual falsifying error, this love
turned to the uses of the animal body or the satisfaction of the vital ego, this life of an average manhood shot
with rare and pale glimpses of godhead and the darker luridities of the demon and the brute. Unerring in the
essence of its will, it is obliged often under the pressure of its instruments to submit to mistakes of action, wrong
placement of feeling, wrong choice of person, errors in the exact form of its will, in the circumstances of its
expression of the infallible inner ideal. Yet is there a divination within it which makes it a surer guide than the
reason or than even the highest desire, and through apparent errors and stumblings its voice can still lead better
than the precise intellect and the considering mental judgment. This voice of the soul is not what we call
conscience—for that is only a mental and often conventional erring substitute; it is a deeper and more seldom
heard call; yet to follow it when heard is wisest: even, it is better to wander at the call of one's soul than to go
apparently straight with the reason and the outward moral mentor. But it is only when the life turns towards the
Divine that the soul can truly come forward and impose its power on the outer members; for, itself a spark of the
Divine, to grow in flame towards the Divine is its true life and its very reason of existence.
\par At a certain stage in the Yoga when the mind is sufficiently quieted and no longer supports itself at every
step on the sufficiency of its mental certitudes, when the vital has been steadied
Page 154

and subdued and is no longer constantly insistent on its own rash will, demand and desire, when the physical has
been sufficiently altered not to bury altogether the inner flame under the mass of its outwardness, obscurity or
inertia, an inmost being, long hidden within and felt only in its rare influences, is able to come forward and
illumine the rest and take up the lead of the Sadhana. Its character is a one-pointed orientation towards the
Divine or the Highest, one-pointed and yet plastic in action and movement; it does not create a rigidity of
direction like the one-pointed intellect or a bigotry of the regnant idea or impulse like the one-pointed vital force; it
is at every moment and with a supple sureness that it points the way to the Truth, automatically distinguishes the
right step from the false, extricates the divine or Godward movement from the clinging mixture of the undivine.
Its action is like a searchlight showing up all that has to be changed in the nature; it has in it a flame of will
insistent on perfection, on an alchemic transmutation of all the inner and outer existence. It sees the divine
essence everywhere but rejects the mere mask and the disguising figure. It insists on Truth, on will and strength
and mastery, on Joy and Love and Beauty, but on a Truth of abiding Knowledge that surpasses the mere
practical momentary truth of the Ignorance, on an inward joy and not on mere vital pleasure,—for it prefers
rather a purifying suffering and sorrow to degrading satisfactions,—on love winged upward and not tied to the
stake of egoistic craving or with its feet sunk in the mire, on beauty restored to its priesthood of interpretation of
the Eternal, on strength and will and mastery as instruments not of the ego but of the Spirit. Its will is for the
divinisation of life, the expression through it of a higher Truth, its dedication to the Divine and the Eternal.
\par But the most intimate character of the psychic is its pressure towards the Divine through a sacred love, joy
and oneness. It is a divine Love that it seeks most, it is the love of the Divine that is its spur, its goal, its star of
Truth shining over the luminous cave of the nascent or the still obscure cradle of the new-born godhead within
us. In the first long stage of its growth and immature existence it has leaned on earthly love, affection,
Page 155

\NH tenderness, goodwill, compassion, benevolence, on all beauty and gentleness and fineness and light and
strength and courage, on all that can help to refine and purify the grossness and commonness of human nature;
but it knows how mixed are these human movements at their best and at their worst how fallen and stamped
with the mark of ego and self-deceptive sentimental falsehood and the lower self profiting by the imitation of a
soul-movement. At once, emerging, it is ready and eager to break all the old ties and imperfect emotional
activities and replace them by a greater spiritual Truth of love and oneness. It may still admit the human forms
and movements, but on condition that they are turned towards the One alone. It accepts only the ties that are
helpful, the heart's and mind's reverence for the Guru, the union of the God-seekers, a spiritual compassion for
this ignorant human and animal world and its peoples, the joy and happiness and satisfaction of beauty that comes
from the perception of the Divine everywhere. It plunges the nature inward towards its meeting with the
immanent Divine in the heart's secret centre and, while that call is there, no reproach of egoism, no mere
outward summons of altruism or duty or philanthropy or service will deceive or divert it from its sacred longing
and its obedience to the attraction of the Divinity within it. It lifts the being towards a transcendent Ecstasy and is
ready to shed all the downward pull of the world from its wings in its uprising to reach the One Highest; but it
calls down also this transcendent Love and Beatitude to deliver and transform this world of hatred and strife and
division and darkness and jarring Ignorance. It opens to a universal Divine Love, a vast compassion, an intense
and immense will for the good of all, for the embrace of the World-Mother enveloping or gathering to her her
children, the divine Passion that has plunged into the night for the redemption of the world from the universal
Inconscience. It is not attracted or misled by mental imitations or any vital misuse of these great deep-seated
Truths of existence; it exposes them with its detecting search-ray and calls down the entire truth of divine Love
to heal these malformations, to deliver mental, vital, physical love from their insufficiencies or
Page 156

their perversions and reveal to them their true abounding share of the intimacy and the oneness, the ascending
ecstasy and the descending rapture.
\par All true Truth of love and of the works of love the psychic being accepts in their place: but its flame mounts
always upward and it is eager to push the ascent from lesser to higher degrees of Truth, since it knows that only
by the ascent to a highest Truth and the descent of that highest Truth can Love be delivered from the cross and
placed upon the throne; for the cross is the sign of the Divine Descent barred and marred by the transversal line
of a cosmic deformation which turns it into a stake of suffering and misfortune. Only by the ascent to the original
Truth can the deformation be healed and all the works of love, as too all the works of knowledge and of life, be
restored to a divine significance and become part of an integral spiritual existence.
Page 157

\par
\hn Chapter VI
\par
\ht The Ascent of the Sacrifice--2; The Works of Love---The Works of Life
\par\drop It is therefore through the sacrifice of love, works and knowledge with the psychic being as the leader
and priest of the sacrifice that life itself can be transformed into its own true spiritual figure. If the sacrifice of
knowledge rightly done is easily the largest and purest offering we can bring to the Highest, the sacrifice of love
is not less demanded of us for our spiritual perfection; it is even more intense and rich in its singleness and can be
made not less vast and pure. This pure wideness is brought into the intensity of the sacrifice of love when into all
our activities there is poured the spirit and power of a divine infinite joy and the whole atmosphere of our life is
suffused with an engrossing adoration of the One who is the All and the Highest. For then does the sacrifice of
love attain its utter perfection when, offered to the divine All, it becomes integral, catholic and boundless, and
when, uplifted to the Supreme, it ceases to be the weak, superficial and transient movement men call love and
becomes a pure and grand and deep uniting Ananda.
\par Although it is a divine love for the supreme and universal Divine that must be the rule of our spiritual
existence, this does not exclude altogether all forms of individual love or the ties that draw soul to soul in
manifested existence. A psychic change is demanded, a divestiture of the masks of the Ignorance, a purification
of the egoistic mental, vital and physical movements that prolong the old inferior consciousness; each movement
of love, spiritualised, must depend no longer on mental preference, vital passion or physical craving, but on the
recognition of soul by soul,—love restored to its fundamental spiritual and psychic essence with the mind, the
vital, the physical as manifesting instruments and elements of that greater oneness.
Page 158

In this change the individual love also is converted by a natural heightening into a divine love for the Divine
Inhabitant immanent in a mind and soul and body occupied by the One in all creatures.
\par All love, indeed, that is adoration has a spiritual force behind it, and even when it is offered ignorantly and to
a limited object, something of that splendour appears through the poverty of the rite and the smallness of its
issues. For love that is worship is at once an aspiration and a preparation: it can bring even within its small limits
in the Ignorance a glimpse of a still more or less blind and partial but surprising realisation; for there are moments
when it is not we but the One who loves and is loved in us, and even a human passion can be uplifted and
glorified by a slight glimpse of this infinite Love and Lover. It is for this reason that the worship of the god, the
worship of the idol, the human magnet or ideal are not to be despised; for these are steps through which the
human race moves towards that blissful passion and ecstasy of the Infinite which, even in limiting it, they yet
represent for our imperfect vision when we have still to use the inferior steps Nature has hewn for our feet and
admit the stages of our progress. Certain idolatries are indispensable for the development of our emotional being,
nor will the man who knows be hasty at any time to shatter the image unless he can replace it in the heart of the
worshipper by the Reality it figures. Moreover, they have this power because there is always something in them
that is greater than their forms and, even when we reach the supreme worship, that abides and becomes a
prolongation of it or a part of its catholic wholeness. Our knowledge is still imperfect in us, love incomplete if
even when we know That which surpasses all forms and manifestations, we cannot still accept the Divine in
creature and object, in man, in the kind, in the animal, in the tree, in the flower, in the work of our hands, in the
Nature-Force which is then no longer to us the blind action of a material machinery but a face and power of the
universal Shakti: for in these things too is the presence of the Eternal.
\par An ultimate inexpressible adoration offered by us to the
Page 159

Transcendent, to the Highest,
\note{\s{para\.m bh\=avam}.} to the Ineffable, is yet no complete worship if it is not offered to him wherever he
manifests or wherever even he hides his godhead—in man
\note{\s{m\=anu\,s\=i\.m tanum \=a\'sritam}.} and object and every creature. An Ignorance is there no doubt which
imprisons the heart, distorts its feelings, obscures the significance of its offering; all partial worship, all religion
which erects a mental or a physical idol is tempted to veil and protect the truth in it by a certain cloak of
ignorance and easily loses the truth in its image. But the pride of exclusive knowledge is also a limitation and a
barrier. For there is, concealed behind individual love, obscured by its ignorant human figure, a mystery which the
mind cannot seize, the mystery of the body of the Divine, the secret of a mystic form of the Infinite which we
can approach only through the ecstasy of the heart and the passion of the pure and sublimated sense, and its
attraction which is the call of the divine Flute-player, the mastering compulsion of the All-Beautiful, can only be
seized and seize us through an occult love and yearning which in the end makes one the Form and the Formless,
and identifies Spirit and Matter. It is that which the spirit in Love is seeking here in the darkness of the Ignorance
and it is that which it finds when individual human love is changed into the love of the Immanent Divine incarnate
in the material universe.
\par As with individual, so with universal Love; all that widening of the self through sympathy, goodwill, universal
benevolence and beneficence, love of mankind, love of creatures, the attraction of all the myriad forms and
presences that surround us, by which mentally and emotionally man escapes from the first limits of his ego, has
to be taken up into a unifying divine love for the universal Divine. Adoration fulfilled in love, love in Ananda,—the
surpassing love, the self-wrapped ecstasy of transcendent delight in the Transcendent which awaits us at the end
of the path of Devotion,—has for its wider result a universal love for all beings, the Ananda of all that is; we
perceive behind every veil the Divine, spiritually embrace in all forms the All-Beautiful. A
Page 160

universal delight in his endless manifestation flows through us, taking in its surge every form and movement, but
not bound or stationary in any and always reaching out to a greater and more perfect expression. This universal
love is liberative and dynamic for transformation; for the discord of forms and appearances ceases to affect the
heart that has felt the one Truth behind them all and understood their perfect significance. The impartial equality
of soul of the selfless worker and knower is transformed by the magic touch of divine Love into an all-embracing
ecstasy and million-bodied beatitude. All things become bodies and all movements the playings of the divine
Beloved in his infinite house of pleasure. Even pain is changed and in their reaction and even in their essence
things painful alter; the forms of pain fall away, there are created in their place the forms of Ananda.
\par This is in its essence the nature of the change of consciousness which turns existence itself into a glorified
field of a Divine Love and Ananda. In its essence it begins for the seeker when he passes from the ordinary to
the spiritual level and looks with a new heart of luminous vision and feeling on the world and self and others. It
reaches its height when the spiritual becomes also the supramental level and then also it is possible not only to
feel it in essence but realise it dynamically as a Power for the transformation of the whole inner life and the
whole outer existence.
\par
\tstar
\par It is not altogether difficult for the mind to envisage, even though it may be difficult for the human will with
its many earth-ties to accept, this transformation of the spirit and nature of love from the character of a mixed
and limited human emotion to a supreme and all-embracing divine passion. It is when we come to the works of
love that a certain perplexity is likely to intervene. It is possible, as in a certain high exaggeration of the path of
knowledge, to cut here also the knot of the problem, escape the difficulty of uniting the spirit of love with the
crudities of the world-action by avoiding it; it is open to us, withdrawing
Page 161

from outward life and action altogether, to live alone with our adoration of the Divine in the heart's silence. It is
possible too to admit only those acts that are either in themselves an expression of love for the Divine, prayer,
praise, symbolic acts of worship or subordinate activities that may be attached to these things and partake of
their spirit, and to leave aside all else; the soul turns away to satisfy its inner longing in the absorbed or the
God-centred life of the saint and devotee. It is possible, again, to open the doors of life more largely and to spend
one's love of the Divine in acts of service to those around us and to the race; one can do the works of
philanthropy, benevolence and beneficence, charity and succour to man and beast and every creature, transfigure
them by a kind of spiritual passion, at least bring into their merely ethical appearance the greater power of a
spiritual motive. This is indeed the solution most commonly favoured by the religious mind of today and we see it
confidently advanced on all sides as the proper field of action of the God-seeker or of the man whose life is
founded on divine love and knowledge. But the integral Yoga pushed towards a complete union of the Divine
with the earth-life cannot stop short in this narrow province or limit this union within the lesser dimensions of an
ethical rule of philanthropy and beneficence. All action must be made in it part of the God-life, our acts of
knowledge, our acts of power and production and creation, our acts of joy and beauty and the soul's pleasure, our
acts of will and endeavour and struggle and not our acts only of love and beneficent service. Its way to do these
things will be not outward and mental, but inward and spiritual, and to that end it will bring into all activities,
whatever they are, the spirit of divine love, the spirit of adoration and worship, the spirit of happiness in the
Divine and in the beauty of the Divine so as to make all life a sacrifice of the works of the soul's love to the
Divine, its cult of the Master of its existence.
\par It is possible so to turn life into an act of adoration to the Supreme by the spirit in one's works; for, says the
Gita, “He who gives to me with a heart of adoration a leaf, a flower, a fruit or a cup of water, I take and enjoy
that offering of his devotion”; and
Page 162

it is not only any dedicated external gift that can be so offered with love and devotion, but all our thoughts, all our
feelings and sensations, all our outward activities and their forms and objects can be such gifts to the Eternal. It
is true that the special act or form of action has its importance, even a great importance, but it is the spirit in the
act that is the essential factor; the spirit of which it is the symbol or materialised expression gives it its whole
value and justifying significance. Or it may be said that a complete act of divine love and worship has in it three
parts that are the expressions of a single whole,—a practical worship of the Divine in the act, a symbol of
worship in the form of the act expressing some vision and seeking or some relation with the Divine, an inner
adoration and longing for oneness or feeling of oneness in the heart and soul and spirit. It is so that life can be
changed into worship,—by putting behind it the spirit of a transcendent and universal love, the seeking of
oneness, the sense of oneness; by making each act a symbol, an expression of Godward emotion or a relation
with the Divine; by turning all we do into an act of worship, an act of the soul's communion, the mind's
understanding, the life's obedience, the heart's surrender.
\par In any cult the symbol, the significant rite or expressive figure is not only a moving and enriching aesthetic
element, but a physical means by which the human being begins to make outwardly definite the emotion and
aspiration of his heart, to confirm it and to dynamise it. For if without a spiritual aspiration worship is meaningless
and vain, yet the aspiration also without the act and the form is a disembodied and, for life, an incompletely
effective power. It is unhappily the fate of all forms in human life to become crystallised, purely formal and
therefore effete, and although form and cult preserve always their power for the man who can still enter into
their meaning, the majority come to use the ceremony as a mechanical rite and the symbol as a lifeless sign, and
because that kills the soul of religion, cult and form have in the end to be changed or thrown aside altogether.
There are those even to whom all cult and form are for this reason suspect and offensive; but few can dispense
with the support of outward symbols and, even, a certain divine element
Page 163

in human nature demands them always for the completeness of its spiritual satisfaction. Always the symbol is
legitimate in so far as it is true, sincere, beautiful and delightful, and even one may say that a spiritual
consciousness without any aesthetic or emotional content is not entirely or at any rate not integrally spiritual. In
the spiritual life the basis of the act is a spiritual consciousness perennial and renovating, moved to express itself
always in new forms or able to renew the truth of a form always by the flow of the spirit, and to so express itself
and make every action a living symbol of some truth of the soul is the very nature of its creative vision and
impulse. It is so that the spiritual seeker must deal with life and transmute its form and glorify it in its essence.
\par A supreme divine Love is a creative Power and, even though it can exist in itself silent and unchangeable,
yet rejoices in external form and expression and is not condemned to be a speechless and bodiless godhead. It
has even been said that creation itself was an act of love or at least the building up of a field in which Divine
Love could devise its symbols and fulfil itself in act of mutuality and self-giving, and, if not the initial nature of
creation, this may well be its ultimate object and motive. It does not so appear now because, even if a Divine
Love is there in the world upholding all this evolution of creatures, yet the stuff of life and its action is made up of
an egoistic formation, a division, a struggle of life and consciousness to exist and survive in an apparently
indifferent, inclement or even hostile world of inanimate and inconscient Matter. In the confusion and obscurity
of this struggle all are thrown against each other with a will in each to assert its own existence first and foremost
and only secondarily to assert itself in others and very partially for others; for even man's altruism remains
essentially egoistic and must be so till the soul finds the secret of the divine Oneness. It is to discover that at its
supreme source, to bring it from within and to radiate it out up to the extreme confines of life that is turned the
effort of the Yoga. All action, all creation must be turned into a form, a symbol of the cult, the adoration, the
sacrifice; it must carry something that makes it bear in it
Page 164

the stamp of a dedication, a reception and translation of the Divine Consciousness, a service of the Beloved, a
self-giving, a surrender. This has to be done wherever possible in the outward body and form of the act; it must
be done always in its inward emotion and an intensity that shows it to be an outflow from the soul towards the
Eternal.
\par In itself the adoration in the act is a great and complete and powerful sacrifice that tends by its
self-multiplication to reach the discovery of the One and make the radiation of the Divine possible. For devotion
by its embodiment in acts not only makes its own way broad and full and dynamic, but brings at once into the
harder way of works in the world the divinely passionate element of joy and love which is often absent in its
beginning when it is only the austere spiritual Will that follows in a struggling uplifting tension the steep ascent,
and the heart is still asleep or bound to silence. If the spirit of divine love can enter, the hardness of the way
diminishes, the tension is lightened, there is a sweetness and joy even in the core of difficulty and struggle. The
indispensable surrender of all our will and works and activities to the Supreme is indeed only perfect and
perfectly effective when it is a surrender of love. All life turned into this cult, all actions done in the love of the
Divine and in the love of the world and its creatures seen and felt as the Divine manifested in many disguises
become by that very fact part of an integral Yoga.
\par It is the inner offering of the heart's adoration, the soul of it in the symbol, the spirit of it in the act, that is the
very life of the sacrifice. If this offering is to be complete and universal, then a turning of all our emotions to the
Divine is imperative. This is the intensest way of purification for the human heart, more powerful than any ethical
or aesthetic catharsis could ever be by its half-power and superficial pressure. A psychic fire within must be lit
into which all is thrown with the Divine Name upon it. In that fire all the emotions are compelled to cast off their
grosser elements and those that are undivine perversions are burned away and the others discard their
insufficiencies, till a spirit of largest love and a stainless divine delight arises out of the
Page 165

flame and smoke and frankincense. It is the divine love which so emerges that, extended in inward feeling to the
Divine in man and all creatures in an active universal equality, will be more potent for the perfectibility of life and
a more real instrument than the ineffective mental ideal of brotherhood can ever be. It is this poured out into acts
that could alone create a harmony in the world and a true unity between all its creatures; all else strives in vain
towards that end so long as Divine Love has not disclosed itself as the heart of the delivered manifestation in
terrestrial Nature.
\par It is here that the emergence of the secret psychic being in us as the leader of the sacrifice is of the utmost
importance; for this inmost being alone can bring with it the full power of the spirit in the act, the soul in the
symbol. It alone can assure, even while the spiritual consciousness is incomplete, the perennial freshness and
sincerity and beauty of the symbol and prevent it from becoming a dead form or a corrupted and corrupting
magic; it alone can preserve for the act its power with its significance. All the other members of our being, mind,
life-force, physical or body consciousness, are too much under the control of the Ignorance to be a sure
instrumentation and much less can they be a guide or the source of an unerring impulse. Always the greater part
of the motive and action of these powers clings to the old law, the deceiving tablets, the cherished inferior
movements of Nature and they meet with reluctance, alarm or revolt or obstructing inertia the voices and the
forces that call and impel us to exceed and transform ourselves into a greater being and a wider Nature. In their
major part the response is either a resistance or a qualified or temporising acquiescence; for even if they follow
the call, they yet tend—when not consciously, then by automatic habit—to bring into the spiritual action their own
natural disabilities and errors. At every moment they are moved to take egoistic advantage of the psychic and
spiritual influences and can be detected using the power, joy or light these bring into us for a lower life-motive.
Afterwards too, even when the seeker has opened to the Divine Love transcendental, universal or immanent, yet
if he tries to pour it into life, he meets the
Page 166

power of obscuration and perversion of these lower Nature-forces. Always they draw away towards pitfalls,
pour into that higher intensity their diminishing elements, seek to capture the descending Power for themselves
and their interests and degrade it into an aggrandised mental, vital or physical instrumentation for desire and ego.
Instead of a Divine Love creator of a new heaven and a new earth of Truth and Light, they would hold it here
prisoner as a tremendous sanction and glorifying force of sublimation to gild the mud of the old earth and colour
with its rose and sapphire the old turbid unreal skies of sentimentalising vital imagination and mental idealised
chimera. If that falsification is permitted, the higher Light and Power and Bliss withdraw, there is a fall back to a
lower status; or else the realisation remains tied to an insecure half-way and mixture or is covered and even
submerged by an inferior exaltation that is not the true Ananda. It is for this reason that Divine Love which is at
the heart of all creation and the most powerful of all redeeming and creative forces has yet been the least
frontally present in earthly life, the least successfully redemptive, the least creative. Human nature has been
unable to bear it in its purity for the very reason that it is the most powerful, pure, rare and intense of all the
divine energies; what little could be seized has been corrupted at once into a vital pietistic ardour, a defenceless
religious or ethical sentimentalism, a sensuous or even sensual erotic mysticism of the roseate coloured mind or
passionately turbid life-impulse and with these simulations compensated its inability to house the Mystic Flame
that could rebuild the world with its tongues of sacrifice. It is only the inmost psychic being unveiled and
emerging in its full power that can lead the pilgrim sacrifice unscathed through these ambushes and pitfalls; at
each moment it catches, exposes, repels the mind's and the life's falsehoods, seizes hold on the truth of the
Divine Love and Ananda and separates it from the excitement of the mind's ardours and the blind enthusiasms of
the misleading life-force. But all things that are true at their core in mind and life and the physical being it
extricates and takes with it in the journey till they stand on the heights, new in spirit and sublime in figure.
Page 167

\par And yet even the leading of the inmost psychic being is not found sufficient until it has succeeded in raising
itself out of this mass of inferior Nature to the highest spiritual levels and the divine spark and flame descended
here have rejoined themselves to their original fiery Ether. For there is there no longer a spiritual consciousness
still imperfect and half lost to itself in the thick sheaths of human mind, life and body, but the full spiritual
consciousness in its purity, freedom and intense wideness. There, as it is the eternal Knower that becomes the
Knower in us and mover and user of all knowledge, so it is the eternal All-Blissful who is the Adored attracting
to himself the eternal divine portion of his being and joy that has gone out into the play of the universe, the infinite
Lover pouring himself out in the multiplicity of his own manifested selves in a happy Oneness. All Beauty in the
world is there the beauty of the Beloved, and all forms of beauty have to stand under the light of that eternal
Beauty and submit themselves to the sublimating and transfiguring power of the unveiled Divine Perfection. All
Bliss and Joy are there of the All-Blissful, and all inferior forms of enjoyment, happiness or pleasure are
subjected to the shock of the intensity of its floods or currents and either they are broken to pieces as inadequate
things under its convicting stress or compelled to transmute themselves into the forms of the Divine Ananda.
Thus for the individual consciousness a Force is manifested which can deal sovereignly in it with the diminutions
and degradations of the values of the Ignorance. At last it begins to be possible to bring down into life the
immense reality and intense concreteness of the love and joy that are of the Eternal. Or at any rate it will be
possible for our spiritual consciousness to raise itself out of mind into the supramental Light and Force and
Vastness; there in the light and potency of the supramental Gnosis are the splendour and joy of a power of divine
self-expression and self-organisation which could rescue and re-create even the world of the Ignorance into a
figure of the Truth of the Spirit.
\par There in the supramental Gnosis is the fulfilment, the culminating height, the all-embracing extent of the
inner adoration, the profound and integral union, the flaming wings of Love
Page 168

upbearing the power and joy of a supreme Knowledge. For supramental Love brings an active ecstasy that
surpasses the void passive peace and stillness which is the heaven of the liberated Mind and does not betray the
deeper greater calm which is the beginning of the supramental silence. The unity of a love which is able to
include in itself all differences without being diminished or abrogated by their present limitations and apparent
dissonances is raised to its full potentiality on the supramental level. For there an intense oneness with all
creatures founded on a profound oneness of the soul with the Divine can harmonise with a play of relations that
only makes the oneness more perfect and absolute. The power of Love supramentalised can take hold of all
living relations without hesitation or danger and turn them Godwards delivered from their crude, mixed and petty
human settings and sublimated into the happy material of a divine life. For it is the very nature of the supramental
experience that it can perpetuate the play of difference without forfeiting or in the least diminishing either the
divine union or the infinite oneness. For a supramentalised consciousness it would be utterly possible to embrace
all contacts with men and the world in a purified flame-force and with a transfigured significance, because the
soul would then perceive always as the object of all emotion and all seeking for love or beauty the One Eternal
and could spiritually use a wide and liberated life-urge to meet and join with that One Divine in all things and all
creatures.
\par
\tstar
\par Into the third and last category of the works of sacrifice can be gathered all that is directly proper to the
Yoga of works; for here is its direct field of effectuation and major province. It covers the entire range of life's
more visible activities; under it fall the multiform energies of the Will-to-Life throwing itself outward to make the
most of material existence. It is here that an ascetic or other-worldly spirituality feels an insurmountable denial of
the Truth which it seeks after and is compelled to turn away from terrestrial existence, rejecting it as for ever the
dark
Page 169

playground of an incurable Ignorance. Yet it is precisely these activities that are claimed for a spiritual conquest
and divine transformation by the integral Yoga. Abandoned altogether by the more ascetic disciplines, accepted
by others only as a field of temporary ordeal or a momentary, superficial and ambiguous play of the concealed
spirit, this existence is fully embraced and welcomed by the integral seeker as a field of fulfilment, a field for
divine works, a field of the total self-discovery of the concealed and indwelling spirit. A discovery of the Divinity
in oneself is his first object, but a total discovery too of the Divinity in the world behind the apparent denial
offered by its scheme and figures and, last, a total discovery of the dynamism of some transcendent Eternal; for
by its descent this world and self will be empowered to break their disguising envelopes and become divine in
revealing form and manifesting process as they now are secretly in their hidden essence.
\par This object of the integral Yoga must be accepted wholly by those who follow it, but the acceptance must
not be in ignorance of the immense stumbling-blocks that lie in the way of the achievement; on the contrary we
must be fully aware of the compelling cause of the refusal of so many other disciplines to regard even its
possibility, much less its imperative character, as the true meaning of terrestrial existence. For here in the works
of life in the earth-nature is the very heart of the difficulty that has driven Philosophy to its heights of aloofness
and turned away even the eager eye of Religion from the malady of birth in a mortal body to a distant Paradise
or a silent peace of Nirvana. A way of pure Knowledge is comparatively straightforward and easy to the tread
of the seeker in spite of our mental limitations and the pitfalls of the Ignorance; a way of pure Love, although it
has its stumbling-blocks and its sufferings and trials, can in comparison be as easy as the winging of a bird
through the free azure. For Knowledge and Love are pure in their essence and become mixed and embarrassed,
corrupted and degraded only when they enter into the ambiguous movement of the life-forces and are seized by
them for the outward life's crude movements and obstinately inferior motives. Alone of the three powers Life
Page 170

or at least a certain predominant Will-in-Life has the appearance of something impure, accursed or fallen in its
very essence. At its contact, wrapped in its dull sheaths or caught in its iridescent quagmires, the divinities
themselves become common and muddy and hardly escape from being dragged downwards into its perversions
and disastrously assimilated to the demon and the Asura. A principle of dark and dull inertia is at its base; all are
tied down by the body and its needs and desires to a trivial mind, petty desires and emotions, an insignificant
repetition of small worthless functionings, needs, cares, occupations, pains, pleasures that lead to nothing beyond
themselves and bear the stamp of an ignorance that knows not its own why and whither. This physical mind of
inertia believes in no divinity other than its own small earth-gods; it aspires perhaps to a greater comfort, order,
pleasure, but asks for no uplifting and no spiritual deliverance. At the centre we meet a stronger Will of life with
a greater gusto, but it is a blinded Daemon, a perverted spirit and exults in the very elements that make of life a
striving turmoil and an unhappy imbroglio. It is a soul of human or Titanic desire clinging to the garish colour,
disordered poetry, violent tragedy or stirring melodrama of this mixed flux of good and evil, joy and sorrow, light
and darkness, heady rapture and bitter torture. It loves these things and would have more and more of them or,
even when it suffers and cries out against them, can accept or joy in nothing else; it hates and revolts against
higher things and in its fury would trample, tear or crucify any diviner Power that has the presumption to offer to
make life pure, luminous and happy and snatch from its lips the fiery brew of that exciting mixture. Another
Will-in-Life there is that is ready to follow the ameliorating ideal Mind and is allured by its offer to extract some
harmony, beauty, light, nobler order out of life, but this is a smaller part of the vital nature and can be easily
overpowered by its more violent or darker duller yoke-comrades; nor does it readily lend itself to a call higher
than that of the Mind unless that call defeats itself, as Religion usually does, by lowering its demand to conditions
more intelligible to our obscure \NH vital nature. All these forces the spiritual seeker grows
Page 171

aware of in himself and finds all around him and has to struggle and combat incessantly to be rid of their grip and
dislodge the long-entrenched mastery they have exercised over his own being as over the environing human
existence. The difficulty is great; for their hold is so strong, so apparently invincible that it justifies the disdainful
dictum which compares human nature to a dog's tail,—for, straighten it never so much by force of ethics,
religion, reason or any other redemptive effort, it returns in the end always to the crooked curl of Nature. And so
great is the vim, the clutch of that more agitated Life-Will, so immense the peril of its passions and errors, so
subtly insistent or persistently invasive, so obstinate up to the very gates of Heaven the fury of its attack or the
tedious obstruction of its obstacles that even the saint and the Yogin cannot be sure of their liberated purity or
their trained self-mastery against its intrigue or its violence. All labour to straighten out this native crookedness
strikes the struggling will as a futility; a flight, a withdrawal to happy Heaven or peaceful dissolution easily finds
credit as the only wisdom and to find a way not to be born again gets established as the only remedy for the dull
bondage or the poor shoddy delirium or the blinded and precarious happiness and achievement of earthly
existence.
\par A remedy yet there should be and is, a way of redress and a chance of transformation for this troubled vital
nature; but for that the cause of deviation must be found and remedied at the heart of Life itself and in its very
principle, since Life too is a power of the Divine and not a creation of some malignant Chance or dark Titanic
impulse, however obscure or perverted may be its actual appearance. In Life itself there is the seed of its own
salvation, it is from the Life-Energy that we must get our leverage; for though there is a saving light in
Knowledge, a redeeming and transforming force in Love, these cannot be effective here unless they secure the
consent of Life and can use the instrumentation of some delivered energy at its centre for a sublimation of the
erring human into a divine Life-Force. It is not possible to cut the difficulty by a splitting up of the works of
sacrifice; we cannot escape it by deciding that we shall
Page 172

do only the works of Love and Knowledge and leave aside the works of will and power, possession and
acquisition, production and fruitful expense of capacity, battle and victory and mastery, striking away from us the
larger part of life because it seems to be made of the very stuff of desire and ego and therefore doomed to be a
field of disharmony and mere conflict and disorder. For the division cannot really be made; or, if attempted, it
must fail in its essential purpose, since it would isolate us from the total energies of the World-Power and sterilise
an important part of integral Nature, just the one force in it that is a necessary instrument in any world-creative
purpose. The Life-Force is an indispensable intermediary, the effectuating element in Nature here; mind needs its
alliance if the works of mind are not to remain shining inner formations without a body; the spirit needs it to give
an outer force and form to its manifested possibilities and arrive at a complete self-expression incarnated in
Matter. If Life refuses the aid of its intermediary energy to the spirit's other workings or is itself refused, they
are likely to be reduced for all the effect they can have here to a static seclusion or a golden impotence; or if
anything is done, it will be a partial irradiation of our action more subjective than objective, modifying existence
perhaps, but without force to change it. Yet if Life brings its forces to the spirit but unregenerate, a worse result
may follow since it is likely to reduce the spiritual action of Love or Knowledge to diminished and corrupted
motions or make them accomplices of its own inferior or perverse workings. Life is indispensable to the
completeness of the creative spiritual realisation, but life released, transformed, uplifted, not the ordinary
mentalised human-animal life, nor the demoniac or Titanic, nor even the divine and the undivine mixed together.
Whatever may be done by other world-shunning or heaven-seeking disciplines, this is the difficult but unavoidable
task of the integral Yoga; it cannot afford to leave unsolved the problem of the outward works of Life, it must
find in them their native Divinity and ally it firmly and for ever to the divinities of Love and Knowledge.
\par It is no solution either to postpone dealing with the works of Life till Love and Knowledge have been
evolved to a point
Page 173

at which they can sovereignly and with safety lay hold on the Life-Force to regenerate it; for we have seen that
they have to rise to immense heights before they can be secure from the vital perversion which hampers or
hamstrings their power to deliver. If once our consciousness could reach the heights of a supramental Nature,
then indeed these disabilities would disappear. But here there is the dilemma that it is impossible to reach the
supramental heights with the burden of an unregenerated Life-Force on our shoulders and equally impossible to
regenerate radically the Will-in-Life without bringing down the infallible light and unconquerable power that
belong to the spiritual and supramental levels. The Supramental Consciousness is not only a Knowledge, a Bliss,
an intimate Love and Oneness, it is also a Will, a principle of Power and Force, and it cannot descend till the
element of Will, of Power, of Force in this manifested Nature is sufficiently developed and sublimated to receive
and bear it. But Will, Power, Force are the native substance of the Life-Energy, and herein lies the justification
for the refusal of Life to acknowledge the supremacy of Knowledge and Love alone,—for its push towards the
satisfaction of something far more unreflecting, headstrong and dangerous that can yet venture too in its own
bold and ardent way towards the Divine and Absolute. Love and Wisdom are not the only aspects of the Divine,
there is also its aspect of Power. As the mind gropes for Knowledge, as the heart feels out for Love, so the
life-force, however fumblingly or trepidantly, stumbles in search of Power and the control given by Power. It is a
mistake of the ethical or religious mind to condemn Power as in itself a thing not to be accepted or sought after
because naturally corrupting and evil; in spite of its apparent justification by a majority of instances, this is at its
core a blind and irrational prejudice. However corrupted and misused, as Love and Knowledge too are corrupted
and misused, Power is divine and put here for a divine use. Shakti, Will, Power is the driver of the worlds and,
whether it be Knowledge-Force or Love-Force or Life-Force or Action-Force or Body-Force, is always spiritual
in its origin and divine in its native character. It is the use of it made in the Ignorance by brute, man or Titan
Page 174

that has to be cast aside and replaced by its greater natural—even if to us supernormal—action led by the Light
of an inner consciousness which is in tune with the Infinite and the Eternal. The integral Yoga cannot reject the
works of Life and be satisfied with an inward experience only; it has to go inward in order to change the
outward, making the Life-Force a part and a working of a Yoga-Energy which is in touch with the Divine and
divine in its guidance.
\par All the difficulty in dealing spiritually with the works of Life arises because the Will-in-Life for its purposes
in the Ignorance has created a false soul of desire and substituted it for that spark of the Divine which is the true
psyche. All or most of the works of life are at present or seem to be actuated and vitiated by this soul of desire;
even those that are ethical or religious, even those that wear the guise of altruism, philanthropy, self-sacrifice,
self-denial, are shot through and through with the threads of its making. This soul of desire is a separative soul of
ego and all its instincts are for a separative self-affirmation; it pushes always, openly or under more or less
shining masks, for its own growth, for possession, for enjoyment, for conquest and empire. If the curse of
disquiet and disharmony and perversion is to be lifted from Life, the true soul, the psychic being, must be given its
leading place and there must be a dissolution of the false soul of desire and ego. But this does not mean that life
itself must be coerced and denied its native line of fulfilment; for behind this outer life soul of desire there is in us
an inner and true vital being which has not to be dissolved but brought out into prominence and released to its
true working as a power of the Divine Nature. The prominence of this true vital being under the lead of the true
inmost soul within us is the condition for the divine fulfilment of the objects of the Life-Force. Those objects will
even remain the same in essence, but transformed in their inner motive and outer character. The Divine
Life-Power too will be a will for growth, a force of self-affirmation, but affirmation of the Divine within us, not of
the little temporary personality on the surface,—growth into the true divine Individual, the central being, the
secret imperishable Person who can emerge only by
Page 175

the subordination and disappearance of the ego. This is life's true object: growth, but a growth of the spirit in
Nature, affirming and developing itself in mind, life and body; possession, but a possession by the Divine of the
Divine in all things, and not of things for their own sake by the desire of the ego; enjoyment, but an enjoyment of
the divine Ananda in the universe; battle and conquest and empire in the shape of a victorious conflict with the
Powers of Darkness, an entire spiritual self-rule and mastery over inward and outward Nature, a conquest by
Knowledge, Love and Divine Will over the domains of the Ignorance.
\par These are the conditions and these must be the aims of the divine effectuation of the works of Life and their
progressive transformation which is the third element of the triple sacrifice. It is not a rationalisation but a
supramentalisation, not a moralising but a spiritualising of life that is the object of the Yoga. It is not a handling of
externals or superficial psychological motives that is its main purpose, but a refounding of life and its action on
their hidden divine element; for only such a refounding of life can bring about its direct government by the secret
Divine Power above us and its transfiguration into a manifest expression of the Divinity, not as now a disguise
and a disfiguring mask of the eternal Actor. It is a spiritual essential change of consciousness, not the surface
manipulation which is the method of Mind and Reason, that can alone make Life other than it now is and rescue
it out of its present distressed and ambiguous figure.
\par
\tstar
\par It is then by a transformation of life in its very principle, not by an external manipulation of its phenomena,
that the integral Yoga proposes to change it from a troubled and ignorant into a luminous and harmonious
movement of Nature. There are three conditions which are indispensable for the achievement of this central
inner revolution and new formation; none of them is altogether sufficient in itself, but by their united threefold
power the uplifting can be done, the conversion made and completely made. For, first, life as it is is a movement
of desire and it has
Page 176

built in us as its centre a desire-soul which refers to itself all the motions of life and puts in them its own troubled
hue and pain of an ignorant, half-lit, baffled endeavour: for a divine living, desire must be abolished and replaced
by a purer and firmer motive-power, the tormented soul of desire dissolved and in its stead there must emerge
the calm, strength, happiness of a true vital being now concealed within us. Next, life as it is is driven or led
partly by the impulse of the life-force, partly by a mind which is mostly a servant and abettor of the ignorant
life-impulse, but in part also its uneasy and not too luminous or competent guide and mentor; for a divine life the
mind and the life-impulse must cease to be anything but instruments and the inmost psychic being must take their
place as the leader on the path and the indicator of a divine guidance. Last, life as it is is turned towards the
satisfaction of the separative ego; ego must disappear and be replaced by the true spiritual person, the central
being, and life itself must be turned towards the fulfilment of the Divine in terrestrial existence; it must feel a
Divine Force awaking within it and become an obedient instrumentation of its purpose.
\par There is nothing that is not ancient and familiar in the first of these three transforming inner movements; for
it has always been one of the principal objects of spiritual discipline. It has been best formulated in the already
expressed doctrine of the Gita by which a complete renouncement of desire for the fruits as the motive of action,
a complete annulment of desire itself, the complete achievement of a perfect equality are put forward as the
normal status of a spiritual being. A perfect spiritual equality is the one true and infallible sign of the cessation of
desire,—to be equal-souled to all things, unmoved by joy and sorrow, the pleasant and the unpleasant, success or
failure, to look with an equal eye on high and low, friend and enemy, the virtuous and the sinner, to see in all
beings the manifold manifestation of the One and in all things the multitudinous play or the slow masked evolution
of the embodied Spirit. It is not a mental quiet, aloofness, indifference, not an inert vital quiescence, not a
passivity of the physical consciousness consenting to no movement or to any movement that is the condition
aimed at, though these
Page 177

things are sometimes mistaken for this spiritual condition, but a wide comprehensive unmoved universality such
as that of the Witness Spirit behind Nature. For all here seems to be a mobile half-ordered half-confused
organisation of forces, but behind them one can feel a supporting peace, silence, wideness, not inert but calm, not
impotent but potentially omnipotent with a concentrated, stable, immobile energy in it capable of bearing all the
motions of the universe. This Presence behind is equal-souled to all things: the energy it holds in it can be
unloosed for any action, but no action will be chosen by any desire in the Witness Spirit; a Truth acts which is
beyond and greater than the action itself or its apparent forms and impulses, beyond and greater than mind or
life-force or body, although it may take for the immediate purpose a mental, a vital or a physical appearance. It is
when there is this death of desire and this calm equal wideness in the consciousness everywhere, that the true
vital being within us comes out from the veil and reveals its own calm, intense and potent presence. For such is
the true nature of the vital being, \sforced{pr\=a\,namaya puru\,sa}; it is a projection of the Divine Purusha into
life,—tranquil, strong, luminous, many-energied, obedient to the Divine Will, egoless, yet or rather therefore
capable of all action, achievement, highest or largest enterprise. The true Life-Force too reveals itself as no
longer this troubled harassed divided striving surface energy, but a great and radiant Divine Power, full of peace
and strength and bliss, a wide-wayed Angel of Life with its wings of Might enfolding the universe.
\par And yet this transformation into a large strength and equality is insufficient; for if it opens to us the
instrumentation of a Divine Life, it does not provide its government and initiative. It is here that the presence of
the released psychic being intervenes; it does not give the supreme government and direction,—for that is not its
function,—but it supplies during the transition from ignorance to a divine Knowledge a progressive guidance for
the inner and outer life and action; it indicates at each moment the method, the way, the steps that will lead to
that fulfilled spiritual condition in which a supreme dynamic initiative will be always there directing the activities
of a divinised Life-Force.
Page 178

The light it sheds illuminates the other parts of the nature which, for want of any better guidance than their own
confused and groping powers, have been wandering in the rounds of the Ignorance; it gives to mind the intrinsic
feeling of the thoughts and perceptions, to life the infallible sense of the movements that are misled or misleading
and those that are well-inspired; something like a quiet oracle from within discloses the causes of our stumblings,
warns in time against their repetition, extracts from experience and intuition the law, not rigid but plastic, of a just
direction for our acts, a right stepping, an accurate impulse. A will is created that becomes more in consonance
with evolving Truth rather than with the circling and dilatory mazes of a seeking Error. A determined orientation
towards the greater Light to be, a soul-instinct, a psychic tact and insight into the true substance, motion and
intention of things, coming always nearer and nearer to a spiritual vision, to a knowledge by inner contact, inner
sight and even identity, begin to replace the superficial keenness of mental judgment and the eager graspings of
the life-force. The works of Life right themselves, escape from confusion, substitute for the artificial or legal
order imposed by the intellect and for the arbitrary rule of desire the guidance of the soul's inner insight, enter
into the profound paths of the Spirit. Above all, the psychic being imposes on life the law of the sacrifice of all its
works as an offering to the Divine and the Eternal. Life becomes a call to that which is beyond Life; its every
smallest act enlarges with the sense of the Infinite.
\par As an inner equality increases and with it the sense of the true vital being waiting for the greater direction it
has to serve, as the psychic call too increases in all the members of our nature, That to which the call is
addressed begins to reveal itself, descends to take possession of the life and its energies and fills them with the
height, intimacy, vastness of its presence and its purpose. In many, if not most, it manifests something of itself
even before the equality and the open psychic urge or guidance are there. A call of the veiled psychic element
oppressed by the mass of the outer ignorance and crying for deliverance, a stress of eager meditation and
seeking for knowledge, a longing of the
Page 179

heart, a passionate will ignorant yet but sincere may break the lid that shuts off that Higher from this Lower
Nature and open the floodgates. A little of the Divine Person may reveal itself or some Light, Power, Bliss, Love
out of the Infinite. This may be a momentary revelation, a flash or a brief-lived gleam that soon withdraws and
waits for the preparation of the nature; but also it may repeat itself, grow, endure. A long and large and
comprehensive working will then have begun, sometimes luminous or intense, sometimes slow and obscure. A
Divine Power comes in front at times and leads and compels or instructs and enlightens; at others it withdraws
into the background and seems to leave the being to its own resources. All that is ignorant, obscure, perverted or
simply imperfect and inferior in the being is raised up, perhaps brought to its acme, dealt with, corrected,
exhausted, shown its own disastrous results, compelled to call for its own cessation or transformation or expelled
as worthless or incorrigible from the nature. This cannot be a smooth and even process; alternations there are of
day and night, illumination and darkness, calm and construction or battle and upheaval, the presence of the
growing Divine Consciousness and its absence, heights of hope and abysses of despair, the clasp of the Beloved
and the anguish of its absence, the overwhelming invasion, the compelling deceit, the fierce opposition, the
disabling mockery of hostile Powers or the help and comfort and communion of the Gods and the Divine
Messengers. A great and long revolution and churning of the ocean of Life with strong emergences of its nectar
and its poison is enforced till all is ready and the increasing Descent finds a being, a nature prepared and
conditioned for its complete rule and its all-encompassing presence. But if the equality and the psychic light and
will are already there, then this process, though it cannot be dispensed with, can still be much lightened and
facilitated: it will be rid of its worst dangers; an inner calm, happiness, confidence will support the steps through
all the difficulties and trials of the transformation and the growing Force profiting by the full assent of the nature
will rapidly diminish and eliminate the power of the opposing forces. A sure guidance and protection will be
present throughout, sometimes
Page 180

standing in front, sometimes working behind the veil, and the power of the end will be already there even in the
beginning and in the long middle stages of the great endeavour. For at all times the seeker will be aware of the
Divine Guide and Protector or the working of the supreme Mother-Force; he will know that all is done for the
best, the progress assured, the victory inevitable. In either case the process is the same and unavoidable, a taking
up of the whole nature, of the whole life, of the internal and of the external, to reveal and handle and transform
its forces and their movements under the pressure of a diviner Life from above, until all here has been possessed
by greater spiritual powers and made an instrumentation of a spiritual action and a divine purpose.
\par In this process and at an early stage of it it becomes evident that what we know of ourselves, our present
conscious existence, is only a representative formation, a superficial activity, a changing external result of a vast
mass of concealed existence. Our visible life and the actions of that life are no more than a series of significant
expressions, but that which it tries to express is not on the surface; our existence is something much larger than
this apparent frontal being which we suppose ourselves to be and which we offer to the world around us. This
frontal and external being is a confused amalgam of mind-formations, life-movements, physical functionings of
which even an exhaustive analysis into its component parts and machinery fails to reveal the whole secret. It is
only when we go behind, below, above into the hidden stretches of our being that we can know it; the most
thorough and acute surface scrutiny and manipulation cannot give us the true understanding or the completely
effective control of our life, its purposes, its activities; that inability indeed is the cause of the failure of reason,
morality and every other surface action to control and deliver and perfect the life of the human race. For below
even our most obscure physical consciousness is a subconscious being in which as in a covering and supporting
soil are all manner of hidden seeds that sprout up, unaccountably to us, on our surface and into which we are
constantly throwing fresh seeds that prolong our past and will influence our future,—a subconscious being,
obscure, small in its motions, \NH capriciously
Page 181

and almost fantastically subrational, but of an immense potency for the earth-life. Again behind our mind, our life,
our conscious physical there is a larger subliminal consciousness,—there are inner mental, inner vital, inner more
subtle physical reaches supported by an inmost psychic existence which is the animating soul of all the rest; and
in these hidden reaches too lie a mass of numerous pre-existent personalities which supply the material, the
motive-forces, the impulsions of our developing surface existence. For in each one of us here there may be one
central person, but also a multitude of subordinate personalities created by the past history of its manifestation or
by expressions of it on these inner planes which support its present play in this external material cosmos. And
while on our surface we are cut off from all around us except through an exterior mind and sense contact which
delivers but little of us to our world or of our world to us, in these inner reaches the barrier between us and the
rest of existence is thin and easily broken; there we can feel at once—not merely infer from their results, but feel
directly—the action of the secret world-forces, mind-forces, life-forces, subtle physical forces that constitute
universal and individual existence; we shall even be able, if we will but train ourselves to it, to lay our hands on
these world-forces that throw themselves on us or surround us and more and more to control or at least strongly
modify their action on us and others, their formations, their very movements. Yet again, above our human mind
are still greater reaches superconscient to it and from there secretly descend influences, powers, touches which
are the original determinants of things here and, if they were called down in their fullness, could altogether alter
the whole make and economy of life in the material universe. It is all this latent experience and knowledge that
the Divine Force working upon us by our opening to it in the integral Yoga, progressively reveals to us, uses and
works out the consequences as means and steps towards a transformation of our whole being and nature. Our
life is thenceforth no longer a little rolling wave on the surface, but interpenetrant if not coincident with the
cosmic life. Our spirit, our self rises not only into an inner identity with some wide cosmic Self but into
Page 182

some contact with that which is beyond, though aware of and dominant over the action of the universe.
\par It is thus by an integralisation of our divided being that the Divine Shakti in the Yoga will proceed to its
object; for liberation, perfection, mastery are dependent on this integralisation, since the little wave on the surface
cannot control its own movement, much less have any true control over the vast life around it. The Shakti, the
power of the Infinite and the Eternal descends within us, works, breaks up our present psychological formations,
shatters every wall, widens, liberates, presents us with always newer and greater powers of vision, ideation,
perception and newer and greater life-motives, enlarges and new-models increasingly the soul and its
instruments, confronts us with every imperfection in order to convict and destroy it, opens to a greater perfection,
does in a brief period the work of many lives or ages so that new births and new vistas open constantly within us.
Expansive in her action, she frees the consciousness from confinement in the body; it can go out in trance or
sleep or even waking and enter into worlds or other regions of this world and act there or carry back its
experience. It spreads out, feeling the body only as a small part of itself, and begins to contain what before
contained it; it achieves the cosmic consciousness and extends itself to be commensurate with the universe. It
begins to know inwardly and directly and not merely by external observation and contact the forces at play in the
world, feels their movement, distinguishes their functioning and can operate immediately upon them as the
scientist operates upon physical forces, accept their action and results in our mind, life, body or reject them or
modify, change, reshape, create immense new powers and movements in place of the old small functionings of
the nature. We begin to perceive the working of the forces of universal Mind and to know how our thoughts are
created by that working, separate from within the truth and falsehood of our perceptions, enlarge their field,
extend and illumine their significance, become master of our own minds and active to shape the movements of
Mind in the world around us. We begin to perceive the flow and surge of the universal life-forces,
Page 183

detect the origin and law of our feelings, emotions, sensations, passions, are free to accept, reject, new-create,
open to wider, rise to higher planes of Life-Power. We begin to perceive too the key to the enigma of Matter,
follow the interplay of Mind and Life and Consciousness upon it, discover more and more its instrumental and
resultant function and detect ultimately the last secret of Matter as a form not merely of Energy but of involved
and arrested or unstably fixed and restricted consciousness and begin to see too the possibility of its liberation
and plasticity of response to higher Powers, its possibilities for the conscious and no longer the more than
half-inconscient incarnation and self-expression of the Spirit. All this and more becomes more and more possible
as the working of the Divine Shakti increases in us and, against much resistance or labour to respond of our
obscure consciousness, through much struggle and movement of progress and regression and renewed progress
necessitated by the work of intensive transformation of a half-inconscient into a conscious substance, moves to a
greater purity, truth, height, range. All depends on the psychic awakening in us, the completeness of our response
to her and our growing surrender.
\par But all this can only constitute a greater inner life with a greater possibility of the outer action and is a
transitional achievement; the full transformation can come only by the ascent of the sacrifice to its farthest
heights and its action upon life with the power and light and beatitude of the divine supramental Gnosis. For then
alone all the forces that are divided and express themselves imperfectly in life and its works are raised to their
original unity, harmony, single truth, authentic absoluteness and entire significance. There Knowledge and Will
are one, Love and Force a single movement; the opposites that afflict us here are resolved into their reconciled
unity: good develops its absolute and evil divesting itself of its error returns to the good that was behind it; sin and
virtue vanish in a divine purity and an infallible truth-movement; the dubious evanescence of pleasure disappears
in a Bliss that is the play of an eternal and happy spiritual certitude, and pain in perishing discovers the touch of
an Ananda which was betrayed by some dark perversion and
Page 184

\NH incapacity of the will of the Inconscient to receive it. These things, to the Mind an imagination or a mystery,
become evident and capable of experience as the consciousness rises out of limited embodied Matter-mind to the
freedom and fullness of the higher and higher ranges of the super-intelligence; but they can become entirely true
and normal only when the supramental becomes the law of the nature.
\par It is therefore on the accomplishment of this ascent and on the possibility of a full dynamism from these
highest levels descending into earth-consciousness that is dependent the justification of Life, its salvation, its
transformation into a Divine Life in a transfigured terrestrial Nature.
\par
\tstar
\par The nature of the integral Yoga so conceived, so conditioned, progressing by these spiritual means, turning
upon this integral transformation of the nature, determines of itself its answer to the question of the ordinary
activities of life and their place in the Yoga.
\par There is not and cannot be here any ascetic or contemplative or mystic abandonment of works and life
altogether, any gospel of an absorbed meditation and inactivity, any cutting away or condemnation of the
Life-Force and its activities, any rejection of the manifestation in the earth-nature. It may be necessary for the
seeker at any period to withdraw into himself, to remain plunged in his inner being, to shut out from him the noise
and turmoil of the life of the Ignorance until a certain inner change has been accomplished or something achieved
without which a further effective action on life has become difficult or impossible. But this can only be a period
or an episode, a temporary necessity or a preparatory spiritual manoeuvre; it cannot be the rule of his Yoga or its
principle.
\par A splitting up of the activities of human existence on a religious or an ethical basis or both together, a
restriction to the works of worship only or to the works of philanthropy and beneficence only would be contrary
to the spirit of the integral
Page 185

Yoga. Any merely mental rule or merely mental acceptance or repudiation is alien to the purpose and method of
its discipline. All must be taken to a spiritual height and placed upon a spiritual basis; the presence of an inner
spiritual change and an outer transformation must be enforced upon the whole of life and not merely on a part of
life; all must be accepted that is helpful towards this change or admits it, all must be rejected that is incapable or
inapt or refuses to submit itself to the transforming movement. There must be no attachment to any form of
things or of life, any object, any activity; all must be renounced if need be, all must be admitted that the Divine
chooses as its material for the divine life. But what accepts or rejects must be neither mind nor open or
camouflaged vital will of desire nor ethical sense, but the insistence of the psychic being, the command of the
Divine Guide of the Yoga, the vision of the higher Self or Spirit, the illumined guidance of the Master. The way
of the spirit is not a mental way; a mental rule or mental consciousness cannot be its determinant or its leader.
\par Equally, a combination or a compromise between two orders of consciousness, the spiritual and the mental
or the spiritual and the vital or a mere sublimation from within of Life outwardly unchanged cannot be the law or
the aim of the Yoga. All life must be taken up but all life must be transformed; all must become a part, a form, an
adequate expression of a spiritual being in the supramental nature. This is the height and crowning movement of
a spiritual evolution in the material world, and as the change from the vital animal to mental man made life
another thing altogether in basic consciousness, scope, significance, so this change from the materialised mental
being to the spiritual and supramental being using but not dominated by matter must take up life and make it
another thing altogether than the flawed, imperfect limited human, quite other in its basic consciousness, scope,
significance. All forms of life activity that cannot bear the change must disappear, all that can bear it will survive
and enter into the kingdom of the spirit. A divine Force is at work and will choose at each moment what has to
be done or has not to be done, what has to be
Page 186

momentarily or permanently taken up, momentarily or permanently abandoned. For provided we do not substitute
for that our desire or our ego, and to that end the soul must be always awake, always on guard, alive to the divine
guidance, resistant to the undivine misleading from within or without us, that Force is sufficient and alone
competent and she will lead us to the fulfilment along ways and by means too large, too inward, too complex for
the mind to follow, much less to dictate. It is an arduous and difficult and dangerous way, but there is none other.
\par Two rules alone there are that will diminish the difficulty and obviate the danger. One must reject all that
comes from the ego, from vital desire, from the mere mind and its presumptuous reasoning incompetence, all that
ministers to these agents of the Ignorance. One must learn to hear and follow the voice of the inmost soul, the
direction of the Guru, the command of the Master, the working of the Divine Mother. Whoever clings to the
desires and weaknesses of the flesh, the cravings and passions of the vital in its turbulent ignorance, the dictates
of his personal mind unsilenced and unillumined by a greater knowledge, cannot find the true inner law and is
heaping obstacles in the way of the divine fulfilment. Whoever is able to detect and renounce those obscuring
agencies and to discern and follow the true Guide within and without will discover the spiritual law and reach the
goal of the Yoga.
\par A radical and total change of consciousness is not only the whole meaning but, in an increasing force and by
progressive stages, the whole method of the integral Yoga.
Page 187

\par
\hn Chapter VII
\par
\ht Standards of Conduct and\nl Spiritual Freedom
\par\drop The knowledge on which the doer of works in Yoga has to found all his action and development has for
the keystone of its structure a more and more concrete perception of unity, the living sense of an all-pervading
oneness; he moves in the increasing consciousness of all existence as an indivisible whole: all work too is part of
this divine indivisible whole. His personal action and its results can no longer be or seem a separate movement
mainly or entirely determined by the egoistic “free” will of an individual, himself separate in the mass. Our works
are part of an indivisible cosmic action; they are put or, more accurately, put themselves into their place in the
whole out of which they arise and their outcome is determined by forces that overpass us. That world action in
its vast totality and in every petty detail is the indivisible movement of the One who manifests himself
progressively in the cosmos. Man too becomes progressively conscious of the truth of himself and the truth of
things in proportion as he awakens to this One within him and outside him and to the occult, miraculous and
significant process of its forces in the motion of Nature. This action, this movement, is not confined even in
ourselves and those around us to the little fragmentary portion of the cosmic activities of which we in our
superficial consciousness are aware; it is supported by an immense underlying environing existence subliminal to
our minds or subconscious, and it is attracted by an immense transcending existence which is superconscious to
our nature. Our action arises, as we ourselves have emerged, out of a universality of which we are not aware;
we give it a shape by our personal temperament, personal mind and will of thought or force of impulse or desire;
but the true
Page 188

truth of things, the true law of action exceeds these personal and human formations. Every standpoint, every
man-made rule of action which ignores the indivisible totality of the cosmic movement, whatever its utility in
external practice, is to the eye of spiritual Truth an imperfect view and a law of the Ignorance.
\par Even when we have arrived at some glimpse of this idea or succeeded in fixing it in our consciousness as a
knowledge of the mind and a consequent attitude of the soul, it is difficult for us in our outward parts and active
nature to square accounts between this universal standpoint and the claims of our personal opinion, our personal
will, our personal emotion and desire. We are forced still to go on dealing with this indivisible movement as if it
were a mass of impersonal material out of which we, the ego, the person, have to carve something according to
our own will and mental fantasy by a personal struggle and effort. This is man's normal attitude towards his
environment, actually false because our ego and its will are creations and puppets of the cosmic forces and it is
only when we withdraw from ego into the consciousness of the divine Knowledge-Will of the Eternal who acts in
them that we can be by a sort of deputation from above their master. And yet is this personal position the right
attitude for man so long as he cherishes his individuality and has not yet fully developed it; for without this
view-point and motive-force he cannot grow in his ego, cannot sufficiently develop and differentiate himself out
of the subconscious or half-conscious universal mass-existence.
\par But the hold of this ego-consciousness upon our whole habit of existence is difficult to shake off when we
have no longer need of the separative, the individualistic and aggressive stage of development, when we would
proceed forward from this necessity of littleness in the child-soul to unity and universality, to the cosmic
consciousness and beyond, to our transcendent spirit-stature. It is indispensable to recognise clearly, not only in
our mode of thought but in our way of feeling, sensing, doing, that this movement, this universal action is not a
helpless impersonal wave of being which lends itself to the will of any ego according
Page 189

to that ego's strength and insistence. It is the movement of a cosmic Being who is the Knower of his field, the
steps of a Divinity who is the Master of his own progressive force of action. As the movement is one and
indivisible, so he who is present in the movement is one, sole and indivisible. Not only all result is determined by
him, but all initiation, action and process are dependent on the motion of his cosmic force and only belong
secondarily and in their form to the creature.
\par But what then must be the spiritual position of the personal worker? What is his true relation in dynamic
Nature to this one cosmic Being and this one total movement? He is a centre only—a centre of differentiation of
the one personal consciousness, a centre of determination of the one total movement; his personality reflects in a
wave of persistent individuality the one universal Person, the Transcendent, the Eternal. In the Ignorance it is
always a broken and distorted reflection because the crest of the wave which is our conscious waking self
throws back only an imperfect and falsified similitude of the divine Spirit. All our opinions, standards, formations,
principles are only attempts to represent in this broken, reflecting and distorting mirror something of the universal
and progressive total action and its many-sided movement towards some ultimate self-revelation of the Divine.
Our mind represents it as best it can with a narrow approximation that becomes less and less inadequate in
proportion as its thought grows in wideness and light and power; but it is always an approximation and not even a
true partial figure. The Divine Will acts through the aeons to reveal progressively not only in the unity of the
cosmos, not only in the collectivity of living and thinking creatures, but in the soul of each individual something of
its divine Mystery and the hidden truth of the Infinite. Therefore there is in the cosmos, in the collectivity, in the
individual, a rooted instinct or belief in its own perfectibility, a constant drive towards an ever increasing and
more adequate and more harmonious self-development nearer to the secret truth of things. This effort is
represented to the constructing mind of man by standards of knowledge, feeling, character, aesthesis and
action,—rules, ideals, norms
Page 190

and laws that he essays to turn into universal dharmas.
\par
\tstar
\par If we are to be free in the spirit, if we are to be subject only to the supreme Truth, we must discard the idea
that our mental or moral laws are binding on the Infinite or that there can be anything sacrosanct, absolute or
eternal even in the highest of our existing standards of conduct. To form higher and higher temporary standards
as long as they are needed is to serve the Divine in his world march; to erect rigidly an absolute standard is to
attempt the erection of a barrier against the eternal waters in their onflow. Once the nature-bound soul realises
this truth, it is delivered from the duality of good and evil. For good is all that helps the individual and the world
towards their divine fullness, and evil is all that retards or breaks up that increasing perfection. But since the
perfection is progressive, evolutive in Time, good and evil are also shifting quantities and change from time to
time their meaning and value. This thing which is evil now and in its present shape must be abandoned was once
helpful and necessary to the general and individual progress. That other thing which we now regard as evil may
well become in another form and arrangement an element in some future perfection. And on the spiritual level
we transcend even this distinction; for we discover the purpose and divine utility of all these things that we call
good and evil. Then have we to reject the falsehood in them and all that is distorted, ignorant and obscure in that
which is called good no less than in that which is called evil. For we have then to accept only the true and the
divine, but to make no other distinction in the eternal processes.
\par To those who can act only on a rigid standard, to those who can feel only the human and not the divine
values, this truth may seem to be a dangerous concession which is likely to destroy the very foundation of
morality, confuse all conduct and establish only chaos. Certainly, if the choice must be between an eternal and
unchanging ethics and no ethics at all, it would have that result for man in his ignorance. But even on the human
level,
Page 191

if we have light enough and flexibility enough to recognise that a standard of conduct may be temporary and yet
necessary for its time and to observe it faithfully until it can be replaced by a better, then we suffer no such loss,
but lose only the fanaticism of an imperfect and intolerant virtue. In its place we gain openness and a power of
continual moral progression, charity, the capacity to enter into an understanding sympathy with all this world of
struggling and stumbling creatures and by that charity a better right and a greater strength to help it upon its way.
In the end where the human closes and the divine commences, where the mental disappears into the supramental
consciousness and the finite precipitates itself into the infinite, all evil disappears into a transcendent divine Good
which becomes universal on every plane of consciousness that it touches.
\par This, then, stands fixed for us that all standards by which we may seek to govern our conduct are only our
temporary, imperfect and evolutive attempts to represent to ourselves our stumbling mental progress in the
universal self-realisation towards which Nature moves. But the divine manifestation cannot be bound by our little
rules and fragile sanctities; for the consciousness behind it is too vast for these things. Once we have grasped
this fact, disconcerting enough to the absolutism of our reason, we shall better be able to put in their right place in
regard to each other the successive standards that govern the different stages in the growth of the individual and
the collective march of mankind. At the most general of them we may cast a passing glance. For we have to see
how they stand in relation to that other standardless spiritual and supramental mode of working for which Yoga
seeks and to which it moves by the surrender of the individual to the divine Will and, more effectively, through his
ascent by this surrender to the greater consciousness in which a certain identity with the dynamic Eternal
becomes possible.
\par
\tstar
\par There are four main standards of human conduct that make an ascending scale. The first is personal need,
preference and desire;
Page 192

the second is the law and good of the collectivity; the third is an ideal ethic; the last is the highest divine law of
the nature.
\par Man starts on the long career of his evolution with only the first two of these four to enlighten and lead him;
for they constitute the law of his animal and vital existence and it is as the vital and physical animal man that he
begins his progress. The true business of man upon earth is to express in the type of humanity a growing image
of the Divine; whether knowingly or unknowingly, it is to this end that Nature is working in him under the thick
veil of her inner and outer processes. But the material or animal man is ignorant of the inner aim of life; he
knows only its needs and its desires and he has necessarily no other guide to what is required of him than his
own perception of need and his own stirrings and pointings of desire. To satisfy his physical and vital demands
and necessities before all things else and, in the next rank, whatever emotional or mental cravings or imaginations
or dynamic notions rise in him must be the first natural rule of his conduct. The sole balancing or overpowering
law that can modify or contradict this pressing natural claim is the demand put on him by the ideas, needs and
desires of his family, community or tribe, the herd, the pack of which he is a member.
\par If man could live to himself,—and this he could only do if the development of the individual were the sole
object of the Divine in the world,—this second law would not at all need to come into operation. But all existence
proceeds by the mutual action and reaction of the whole and the parts, the need for each other of the
constituents and the thing constituted, the interdependence of the group and the individuals of the group. In the
language of Indian philosophy the Divine manifests himself always in the double form of the separative and the
collective being, \s{vya\,s\,ti}, \s{sama\,s\,ti}. Man, pressing after the growth of his separate individuality and its
fullness and freedom, is unable to satisfy even his own personal needs and desires except in conjunction with
other men; he is a whole in himself and yet incomplete without others. This obligation englobes his personal law
of conduct in a group-law which arises from the formation of a lasting group-entity with a collective mind and life
of its
Page 193

own to which his own embodied mind and life are subordinated as a transitory unit. And yet is there something in
him immortal and free, not bound to this group-body which outlasts his own embodied existence but cannot
outlast or claim to chain by its law his eternal spirit.
\par In itself this seemingly larger and overriding law is no more than an extension of the vital and animal
principle that governs the individual elementary man; it is the law of the pack or herd. The individual identifies
partially his life with the life of a certain number of other individuals with whom he is associated by birth, choice
or circumstance. And since the existence of the group is necessary for his own existence and satisfaction, in
time, if not from the first, its preservation, the fulfilment of its needs and the satisfaction of its collective notions,
desires, habits of living, without which it would not hold together, must come to take a primary place. The
satisfaction of personal idea and feeling, need and desire, propensity and habit has to be constantly subordinated,
by the necessity of the situation and not from any moral or altruistic motive, to the satisfaction of the ideas and
feelings, needs and desires, propensities and habits, not of this or that other individual or number of individuals,
but of the society as a whole. This social need is the obscure matrix of morality and of man's ethical impulse.
\par It is not actually known that in any primitive times man lived to himself or with only his mate as do some of
the animals. All record of him shows him to us as a social animal, not an isolated body and spirit. The law of the
pack has always overridden his individual law of self-development; he seems always to have been born, to have
lived, to have been formed as a unit in a mass. But logically and naturally from the psychological view-point the
law of personal need and desire is primary, the social law comes in as a secondary and usurping power. Man has
in him two distinct master impulses, the individualistic and the communal, a personal life and a social life, a
personal motive of conduct and a social motive of conduct. The possibility of their opposition and the attempt to
find their equation lie at the very roots of human civilisation and persist in other figures when he
Page 194

has passed beyond the vital animal into a highly individualised mental and spiritual progress.
\par The existence of a social law external to the individual is at different times a considerable advantage and a
heavy disadvantage to the development of the divine in man. It is an advantage at first when man is crude and
incapable of self-control and self-finding, because it erects a power other than that of his personal egoism
through which that egoism may be induced or compelled to moderate its savage demands, to discipline its
irrational and often violent movements and even to lose itself sometimes in a larger and less personal egoism. It is
a disadvantage to the adult spirit ready to transcend the human formula because it is an external standard which
seeks to impose itself on him from outside, and the condition of his perfection is that he shall grow from within
and in an increasing freedom, not by the suppression but by the transcendence of his perfected individuality, not
any longer by a law imposed on him that trains and disciplines his members but by the soul from within breaking
through all previous forms to possess with its light and transmute his members.
\par
\tstar
\par In the conflict of the claims of society with the claims of the individual two ideal and absolute solutions
confront one another. There is the demand of the group that the individual should subordinate himself more or
less completely or even lose his independent existence in the community,—the smaller must be immolated or
self-offered to the larger unit. He must accept the need of the society as his own need, the desire of the society
as his own desire; he must live not for himself but for the tribe, clan, commune or nation of which he is a
member. The ideal and absolute solution from the individual's standpoint would be a society that existed not for
itself, for its all-overriding collective purpose, but for the good of the individual and his fulfilment, for the greater
and more perfect life of all its members. Representing as far as possible his best self and helping him to realise it,
it would
Page 195

respect the freedom of each of its members and maintain itself not by law and force but by the free and
spontaneous consent of its constituent persons. An ideal society of either kind does not exist anywhere and
would be most difficult to create, more difficult still to keep in precarious existence so long as individual man
clings to his egoism as the primary motive of existence. A general but not complete domination of the society
over the individual is the easier way and it is the system that Nature from the first instinctively adopts and keeps
in equilibrium by rigorous law, compelling custom and a careful indoctrination of the still subservient and
ill-developed intelligence of the human creature.
\par In primitive societies the individual life is submitted to rigid and immobile communal custom and rule; this is
the ancient and would-be eternal law of the human pack that tries always to masquerade as the everlasting
decree of the Imperishable, \s{e\,sa dharma\,h san\=atana\,h}. And the ideal is not dead in the human mind; the most
recent trend of human progress is to establish an enlarged and sumptuous edition of this ancient turn of collective
living towards the enslavement of the human spirit. There is here a serious danger to the integral development of
a greater truth upon earth and a greater life. For the desires and free seekings of the individual, however egoistic,
however false or perverted they may be in their immediate form, contain in their obscure shell the seed of a
development necessary to the whole; his searchings and stumblings have behind them a force that has to be kept
and transmuted into the image of the divine ideal. That force needs to be enlightened and trained but must not be
suppressed or harnessed exclusively to society's heavy cart-wheels. Individualism is as necessary to the final
perfection as the power behind the group-spirit; the stifling of the individual may well be the stifling of the god in
man. And in the present balance of humanity there is seldom any real danger of exaggerated individualism
breaking up the social integer. There is continually a danger that the exaggerated pressure of the social mass by
its heavy unenlightened mechanical weight may suppress or unduly discourage the free development of the
individual spirit. For man in the individual can be more easily enlightened, conscious,
Page 196

open to clear influences; man in the mass is still obscure, half-conscious, ruled by universal forces that escape its
mastery and its knowledge.
\par Against this danger of suppression and immobilisation Nature in the individual reacts. It may react by an
isolated resistance ranging from the instinctive and brutal revolt of the criminal to the complete negation of the
solitary and ascetic. It may react by the assertion of an individualistic trend in the social idea, may impose it on
the mass consciousness and establish a compromise between the individual and the social demand. But a
compromise is not a solution; it only salves over the difficulty and in the end increases the complexity of the
problem and multiplies its issues. A new principle has to be called in other and higher than the two conflicting
instincts and powerful at once to override and to reconcile them. Above the natural individual law which sets up
as our one standard of conduct the satisfaction of our individual needs, preferences and desires and the natural
communal law which sets up as a superior standard the satisfaction of the needs, preferences and desires of the
community as a whole, there had to arise the notion of an ideal moral law which is not the satisfaction of need
and desire, but controls and even coerces or annuls them in the interests of an ideal order that is not animal, not
vital and physical, but mental, a creation of the mind's seeking for light and knowledge and right rule and right
movement and true order. The moment this notion becomes powerful in man, he begins to escape from the
engrossing vital and material into the mental life; he climbs from the first to the second degree of the threefold
ascent of Nature. His needs and desires themselves are touched with a more elevated light of purpose and the
mental need, the aesthetic, intellectual and emotional desire begin to predominate over the demand of the physical
and vital nature.
\par
\tstar
\par The natural law of conduct proceeds from a conflict to an equilibrium of forces, impulsions and desires; the
higher ethical law
Page 197

proceeds by the development of the mental and moral nature towards a fixed internal standard or else a
self-formed ideal of absolute qualities,—justice, righteousness, love, right reason, right power, beauty, light. It is
therefore essentially an individual standard; it is not a creation of the mass mind. The thinker is the individual; it is
he who calls out and throws into forms that which would otherwise remain subconscious in the amorphous
human whole. The moral striver is also the individual; self-discipline, not under the yoke of an outer law, but in
obedience to an internal light, is essentially an individual effort. But by positing his personal standard as the
translation of an absolute moral ideal the thinker imposes it, not on himself alone, but on all the individuals whom
his thought can reach and penetrate. And as the mass of individuals come more and more to accept it in idea if
only in an imperfect practice or no practice, society also is compelled to obey the new orientation. It absorbs the
ideative influence and tries, not with any striking success, to mould its institutions into new forms touched by
these higher ideals. But always its instinct is to translate them into binding law, into pattern forms, into mechanic
custom, into an external social compulsion upon its living units.
\par For, long after the individual has become partially free, a moral organism capable of conscious growth,
aware of an inward life, eager for spiritual progress, society continues to be external in its methods, a material
and economic organism, mechanical, more intent upon status and self-preservation than on growth and
self-perfection. The greatest present triumph of the thinking and progressive individual over the instinctive and
static society has been the power he has acquired by his thought-will to compel it to think also, to open itself to
the idea of social justice and righteousness, communal sympathy and mutual compassion, to feel after the rule of
reason rather than blind custom as the test of its institutions and to look on the mental and moral assent of its
individuals as at least one essential element in the validity of its laws. Ideally at least, to consider light rather than
force as its sanction, moral development and not vengeance or restraint as the object even of its penal action, is
becoming just
Page 198

possible to the communal mind. The greatest future triumph of the thinker will come when he can persuade the
individual integer and the collective whole to rest their life-relation and its union and stability upon a free and
harmonious consent and self-adaptation, and shape and govern the external by the internal truth rather than to
constrain the inner spirit by the tyranny of the external form and structure.
\par But even this success that he has gained is rather a thing in potentiality than in actual accomplishment.
There is always a disharmony and a discord between the moral law in the individual and the law of his needs and
desires, between the moral law proposed to society and the physical and vital needs, desires, customs, prejudices,
interests and passions of the caste, the clan, the religious community, the society, the nation. The moralist erects
in vain his absolute ethical standard and calls upon all to be faithful to it without regard to consequences. To him
the needs and desires of the individual are invalid if they are in conflict with the moral law, and the social law has
no claims upon him if it is opposed to his sense of right and denied by his conscience. This is his absolute solution
for the individual that he shall cherish no desires and claims that are not consistent with love, truth and justice. He
demands from the community or nation that it shall hold all things cheap, even its safety and its most pressing
interests, in comparison with truth, justice, humanity and the highest good of the peoples.
\par No individual rises to these heights except in intense moments, no society yet created satisfies this ideal.
And in the present state of morality and of human development none perhaps can or ought to satisfy it. Nature
will not allow it, Nature knows that it should not be. The first reason is that our moral ideals are themselves for
the most part ill-evolved, ignorant and arbitrary, mental constructions rather than transcriptions of the eternal
truths of the spirit. Authoritative and dogmatic, they assert certain absolute standards in theory, but in practice
every existing system of ethics proves either in application unworkable or is in fact a constant coming short of
the absolute standard to which the ideal pretends. If our ethical system is a compromise
Page 199

or a makeshift, it gives at once a principle of justification to the further sterilising compromises which society and
the individual hasten to make with it. And if it insists on absolute love, justice, right with an uncompromising
insistence, it soars above the head of human possibility and is professed with lip homage but ignored in practice.
Even it is found that it ignores other elements in humanity which equally insist on survival but refuse to come
within the moral formula. For just as the individual law of desire contains within it invaluable elements of the
infinite whole which have to be protected against the tyranny of the absorbing social idea, the innate impulses too
both of individual and of collective man contain in them invaluable elements which escape the limits of any ethical
formula yet discovered and are yet necessary to the fullness and harmony of an eventual divine perfection.
\par Moreover, absolute love, absolute justice, absolute right reason in their present application by a bewildered
and imperfect humanity come easily to be conflicting principles. Justice often demands what love abhors. Right
reason dispassionately considering the facts of nature and human relations in search of a satisfying norm or rule
is unable to admit without modification either any reign of absolute justice or any reign of absolute love. And in
fact man's absolute justice easily turns out to be in practice a sovereign injustice; for his mind, one-sided and rigid
in its constructions, puts forward a one-sided partial and rigorous scheme or figure and claims for it totality and
absoluteness and an application that ignores the subtler truth of things and the plasticity of life. All our standards
turned into action either waver on a flux of compromises or err by this partiality and unelastic structure.
Humanity sways from one orientation to another; the race moves upon a zigzag path led by conflicting claims
and, on the whole, works out instinctively what Nature intends, but with much waste and suffering, rather than
either what it desires or what it holds to be right or what the highest light from above demands from the
embodied spirit.
\par
\tstar
Page 200

\par The fact is that when we have reached the cult of absolute ethical qualities and erected the
categorical imperative of an ideal law, we have not come to the end of our search or touched the truth that
delivers. There is, no doubt, something here that helps us to rise beyond limitation by the physical and vital man in
us, an insistence that overpasses the individual and collective needs and desires of a humanity still bound to the
living mud of Matter in which it took its roots, an aspiration that helps to develop the mental and moral being in
us: this new sublimating element has been therefore an acquisition of great importance; its workings have marked
a considerable step forward in the difficult evolution of terrestrial Nature. And behind the inadequacy of these
ethical conceptions something too is concealed that does attach to a supreme Truth; there is here the glimmer of
a light and power that are part of a yet unreached divine Nature. But the mental idea of these things is not that
light and the moral formulation of them is not that power. These are only representative constructions of the mind
that cannot embody the divine spirit which they vainly endeavour to imprison in their categorical formulas.
Beyond the mental and moral being in us is a greater divine being that is spiritual and supramental; for it is only
through a large spiritual plane where the mind's formulas dissolve in a white flame of direct inner experience that
we can reach beyond mind and pass from its constructions to the vastness and freedom of the supramental
realities. There alone can we touch the harmony of the divine powers that are poorly mispresented to our mind or
framed into a false figure by the conflicting or wavering elements of the moral law. There alone the unification of
the transformed vital and physical and the illumined mental man becomes possible in that supramental Spirit
which is at once the secret source and goal of our mind and life and body. There alone is there any possibility of
an absolute justice, love and right—far other than that which we imagine—at one with each other in the light of a
supreme divine knowledge. There alone can there be a reconciliation of the conflict between our members.
\par In other words there is, above society's external law and
Page 201

man's moral law and beyond them, though feebly and ignorantly aimed at by something within them, a larger truth
of a vast unbound consciousness, a law divine towards which both these blind and gross formulations are
progressive faltering steps that try to escape from the natural law of the animal to a more exalted light or
universal rule. That divine standard, since the godhead in us is our spirit moving towards its own concealed
perfection, must be a supreme spiritual law and truth of our nature. Again, as we are embodied beings in the
world with a common existence and nature and yet individual souls capable of direct touch with the
Transcendent, this supreme truth of ourselves must have a double character. It must be a law and truth that
discovers the perfect movement, harmony, rhythm of a great spiritualised collective life and determines perfectly
our relations with each being and all beings in Nature's varied oneness. It must be at the same time a law and
truth that discovers to us at each moment the rhythm and exact steps of the direct expression of the Divine in the
soul, mind, life, body of the individual creature.
\note{Therefore the Gita defines “dharma”, an expression which means more than either religion or morality, as
action controlled by our essential manner of self-being.} And we find in experience that this supreme light and
force of action in its highest expression is at once an imperative law and an absolute freedom. It is an imperative
law because it governs by immutable Truth our every inner and outer movement. And yet at each moment and in
each movement the absolute freedom of the Supreme handles the perfect plasticity of our conscious and
liberated nature.
\par The ethical idealist tries to discover this supreme law in his own moral data, in the inferior powers and
factors that belong to the mental and ethical formula. And to sustain and organise them he selects a fundamental
principle of conduct essentially unsound and constructed by the intellect—utility, hedonism, reason, intuitive
conscience or any other generalised standard. All such efforts are foredoomed to failure. Our inner nature is the
progressive expression of the eternal Spirit and too complex a power to be tied down by a single dominant mental
or
Page 202

moral principle. Only the supramental consciousness can reveal to its differing and conflicting forces their
spiritual truth and harmonise their divergences.
\par The later religions endeavour to fix the type of a supreme truth of conduct, erect a system and declare God's
law through the mouth of Avatar or prophet. These systems, more powerful and dynamic than the dry ethical
idea, are yet for the most part no more than idealistic glorifications of the moral principle sanctified by religious
emotion and the label of a superhuman origin. Some, like the extreme Christian ethic, are rejected by Nature
because they insist unworkably on an impracticable absolute rule. Others prove in the end to be evolutionary
compromises and become obsolete in the march of Time. The true divine law, unlike these mental counterfeits,
cannot be a system of rigid ethical determinations that press into their cast-iron moulds all our life-movements.
The Law divine is truth of life and truth of the spirit and must take up with a free living plasticity and inspire with
the direct touch of its eternal light each step of our action and all the complexity of our life issues. It must act not
as a rule and formula but as an enveloping and penetrating conscious presence that determines all our thoughts,
activities, feelings, impulsions of will by its infallible power and knowledge.
\par The older religions erected their rule of the wise, their dicta of Manu or Confucius, a complex Shastra in
which they attempted to combine the social rule and moral law with the declaration of certain eternal principles
of our highest nature in some kind of uniting amalgam. All three were treated on the same ground as equally the
expression of everlasting verities, \s{san\=atana dharma}. But two of these elements are evolutionary and valid for
a time, mental constructions, human readings of the will of the Eternal; the third, attached and subdued to certain
social and moral formulas, had to share the fortunes of its forms. Either the Shastra grows obsolete and has to be
progressively changed or finally cast away or else it stands as a rigid barrier to the self-development of the
individual and the race. The Shastra erects a collective and external standard; it ignores the inner nature of the
individual, the indeterminable
Page 203

elements of a secret spiritual force within him. But the nature of the individual will not be ignored; its demand is
inexorable. The unrestrained indulgence of his outer impulses leads to anarchy and dissolution, but the
suppression and coercion of his soul's freedom by a fixed and mechanical rule spells stagnation or an inner death.
Not this coercion or determination from outside, but the free discovery of his highest spirit and the truth of an
eternal movement is the supreme thing that he has to discover.
\par The higher ethical law is discovered by the individual in his mind and will and psychic sense and then
extended to the race. The supreme law also must be discovered by the individual in his spirit. Then only, through
a spiritual influence and not by the mental idea, can it be extended to others. A moral law can be imposed as a
rule or an ideal on numbers of men who have not attained that level of consciousness or that fineness of mind
and will and psychic sense in which it can become a reality to them and a living force. As an ideal it can be
revered without any need of practice. As a rule it can be observed in its outsides even if the inner sense is
missed altogether. The supramental and spiritual life cannot be mechanised in this way, it cannot be turned into a
mental ideal or an external rule. It has its own great lines, but these must be made real, must be the workings of
an active Power felt in the individual's consciousness and the transcriptions of an eternal Truth powerful to
transform mind, life and body. And because it is thus real, effective, imperative, the generalisation of the
supramental consciousness and the spiritual life is the sole force that can lead to individual and collective
perfection in earth's highest creatures. Only by our coming into constant touch with the divine Consciousness and
its absolute Truth can some form of the conscious Divine, the dynamic Absolute, take up our earth-existence and
transform its strife, stumbling, sufferings and falsities into an image of the supreme Light, Power and Ananda.
\par The culmination of the soul's constant touch with the Supreme is that self-giving which we call surrender to
the divine Will and immergence of the separated ego in the One who is all. A vast universality of soul and an
intense unity with all is
Page 204

the base and fixed condition of the supramental consciousness and spiritual life. In that universality and unity
alone can we find the supreme law of the divine manifestation in the life of the embodied spirit; in that alone can
we discover the supreme motion and right play of our individual nature. In that alone can all these lower discords
resolve themselves into a victorious harmony of the true relations between manifested beings who are portions of
the one Godhead and children of one universal Mother.
\par
\tstar
\par All conduct and action are part of the movement of a Power, a Force infinite and divine in its origin and
secret sense and will even though the forms of it we see seem inconscient or ignorant, material, vital, mental,
finite, which is working to bring out progressively something of the Divine and Infinite in the obscurity of the
individual and collective nature. This power is leading towards the Light, but still through the Ignorance. It leads
man first through his needs and desires; it guides him next through enlarged needs and desires modified and
enlightened by a mental and moral ideal. It is preparing to lead him to a spiritual realisation that overrides these
things and yet fulfils and reconciles them in all that is divinely true in their spirit and purpose. It transforms the
needs and desires into a divine Will and Ananda. It transforms the mental and moral aspiration into the powers of
Truth and Perfection that are beyond them. It substitutes for the divided straining of the individual nature, for the
passion and strife of the separate ego, the calm, profound, harmonious and happy law of the universalised person
within us, the central being, the spirit that is a portion of the supreme Spirit. This true Person in us, because it is
universal, does not seek its separate gratification but only asks in its outward expression in Nature its growth to
its real stature, the expression of its inner divine self, that transcendent spiritual power and presence within it
which is one with all and in sympathy with each thing and creature and with all the collective personalities and
powers of the divine
Page 205

existence, and yet it transcends them and is not bound by the egoism of any creature or collectivity or limited by
the ignorant controls of their lower nature. This is the high realisation in front of all our seeking and striving, and it
gives the sure promise of a perfect reconciliation and transmutation of all the elements of our nature. A pure,
total and flawless action is possible only when that is effected and we have reached the height of this secret
Godhead within us.
\par The perfect supramental action will not follow any single principle or limited rule. It is not likely to satisfy the
standard either of the individual egoist or of any organised group-mind. It will conform to the demand neither of
the positive practical man of the world nor of the formal moralist nor of the patriot nor of the sentimental
philanthropist nor of the idealising philosopher. It will proceed by a spontaneous outflowing from the summits in
the totality of an illumined and uplifted being, will and knowledge and not by the selected, calculated and
standardised action which is all that the intellectual reason or ethical will can achieve. Its sole aim will be the
expression of the divine in us and the keeping together of the world and its progress towards the Manifestation
that is to be. This even will not be so much an aim and purpose as a spontaneous law of the being and an intuitive
determination of the action by the Light of the divine Truth and its automatic influence. It will proceed like the
action of Nature from a total will and knowledge behind her, but a will and knowledge enlightened in a conscious
supreme Nature and no longer obscure in this ignorant Prakriti. It will be an action not bound by the dualities but
full and large in the spirit's impartial joy of existence. The happy and inspired movement of a divine Power and
Wisdom guiding and impelling us will replace the perplexities and stumblings of the suffering and ignorant ego.
\par If by some miracle of divine intervention all mankind at once could be raised to this level, we should have
something on earth like the Golden Age of the traditions, Satya Yuga, the Age of Truth or true existence. For the
sign of the Satya Yuga is that the Law is spontaneous and conscious in each creature and does
Page 206

its own works in a perfect harmony and freedom. Unity and universality, not separative division, would be the
foundation of the consciousness of the race; love would be absolute; equality would be consistent with hierarchy
and perfect in difference; absolute justice would be secured by the spontaneous action of the being in harmony
with the truth of things and the truth of himself and others and therefore sure of true and right result; right
reason, no longer mental but supramental, would be satisfied not by the observation of artificial standards but by
the free automatic perception of right relations and their inevitable execution in the act. The quarrel between the
individual and society or disastrous struggle between one community and another could not exist: the cosmic
consciousness imbedded in embodied beings would assure a harmonious diversity in oneness.
\par In the actual state of humanity, it is the individual who must climb to this height as a pioneer and precursor.
His isolation will necessarily give a determination and a form to his outward activities that must be quite other
than those of a consciously divine collective action. The inner state, the root of his acts, will be the same; but the
acts themselves may well be very different from what they would be on an earth liberated from ignorance.
Nevertheless his consciousness and the divine mechanism of his conduct, if such a word can be used of so free a
thing, would be such as has been described, free from that subjection to vital impurity and desire and wrong
impulse which we call sin, unbound by that rule of prescribed moral formulas which we call virtue, spontaneously
sure and pure and perfect in a greater consciousness than the mind's, governed in all its steps by the light and
truth of the Spirit. But if a collectivity or group could be formed of those who had reached the supramental
perfection, there indeed some divine creation could take shape; a new earth could descend that would be a new
heaven, a world of supramental light could be created here amidst the receding darkness of this terrestrial
ignorance.
Page 207

\par
\hn Chapter VIII
\par
\ht The Supreme Will
\par\drop In the light of this progressive manifestation of the Spirit, first apparently bound in the Ignorance, then
free in the power and wisdom of the Infinite, we can better understand the great and crowning injunction of the
Gita to the Karmayogin, “Abandoning all dharmas, all principles and laws and rules of conduct, take refuge in me
alone.” All standards and rules are temporary constructions founded upon the needs of the ego in its transition
from Matter to Spirit. These makeshifts have a relative imperativeness so long as we rest satisfied in the stages
of transition, content with the physical and vital life, attached to the mental movement, or even fixed in the ranges
of the mental plane that are touched by the spiritual lustres. But beyond is the unwalled wideness of a
supramental infinite consciousness and there all temporary structures cease. It is not possible to enter utterly into
the spiritual truth of the Eternal and Infinite if we have not the faith and courage to trust ourselves into the hands
of the Lord of all things and the Friend of all creatures and leave utterly behind us our mental limits and
measures. At one moment we must plunge without hesitation, reserve, fear or scruple into the ocean of the free,
the infinite, the Absolute. After the Law, Liberty; after the personal, after the general, after the universal
standards there is something greater, the impersonal plasticity, the divine freedom, the transcendent force and the
supernal impulse. After the strait path of the ascent the wide plateaus on the summit.
\par There are three stages of the ascent,—at the bottom the bodily life enslaved to the pressure of necessity and
desire, in the middle the mental, higher emotional and psychic rule that feels after greater interests, aspirations,
experiences, at the summits first a deeper psychic and spiritual state and then a supramental eternal
consciousness in which all our aspirations and seekings
Page 208

discover their own intimate significance. In the bodily life first desire and need and then the practical good of the
individual and the society are the governing consideration, the dominant force. In the mental life ideas and ideals
rule, ideas that are half-lights wearing the garb of Truth, ideals formed by the mind as a result of a growing but
still imperfect intuition and experience. Whenever the mental life prevails and the bodily diminishes its brute
insistence, man the mental being feels pushed by the urge of mental Nature to mould in the sense of the idea or
the ideal the life of the individual, and in the end even the vaguer more complex life of the society is forced to
undergo this subtle process. In the spiritual life, or when a higher power than Mind has manifested and taken
possession of the nature, these limited motive-forces recede, dwindle, tend to disappear. The spiritual or
supramental Self, the Divine Being, the supreme and immanent Reality, must be alone the Lord within us and
shape freely our final development according to the highest, widest, most integral expression possible of the law
of our nature. In the end that nature acts in the perfect Truth and its spontaneous freedom; for it obeys only the
luminous power of the Eternal. The individual has nothing further to gain, no desire to fulfil; he has become a
portion of the impersonality or the universal personality of the Eternal. No other object than the manifestation and
play of the Divine Spirit in life and the maintenance and conduct of the world in its march towards the divine goal
can move him to action. Mental ideas, opinions, constructions are his no more; for his mind has fallen into silence,
it is only a channel for the Light and Truth of the divine knowledge. Ideals are too narrow for the vastness of his
spirit; it is the ocean of the Infinite that flows through him and moves him for ever.
\par
\tstar
\par Whoever sincerely enters the path of works, must leave behind him the stage in which need and desire are
the first law of our acts. For whatever desires still trouble his being, he must, if he accepts the high aim of Yoga,
put them away from him into the
Page 209

hands of the Lord within us. The supreme Power will deal with them for the good of the sadhaka and for the
good of all. In effect, we find that once this surrender is done,—always provided the rejection is
sincere,—egoistic indulgence of desire may for some time recur under the continued impulse of past nature but
only in order to exhaust its acquired momentum and to teach the embodied being in his most unteachable part, his
nervous, vital, emotional nature, by the reactions of desire, by its grief and unrest bitterly contrasted with calm
periods of the higher peace or marvellous movements of divine Ananda, that egoistic desire is not a law for the
soul that seeks liberation or aspires to its own original god-nature. Afterwards the element of desire in those
impulsions will be thrown away or persistently eliminated by a constant denying and transforming pressure. Only
the pure force of action in them (\s{prav\,rtti}) justified by an equal delight in all work and result that is inspired or
imposed from above will be preserved in the happy harmony of a final perfection. To act, to enjoy is the normal
law and right of the nervous being; but to choose by personal desire its action and enjoyment is only its ignorant
will, not its right. Alone the supreme and universal Will must choose; action must change into a dynamic
movement of that Will; enjoyment must be replaced by the play of a pure spiritual Ananda. All personal will is
either a temporary delegation from on high or a usurpation by the ignorant Asura.
\par The social law, that second term of our progress, is a means to which the ego is subjected in order that it
may learn discipline by subordination to a wider collective ego. This law may be quite empty of any moral
content and may express only the needs or the practical good of the society as each society conceives it. Or it
may express those needs and that good, but modified and coloured and supplemented by a higher moral or ideal
law. It is binding on the developing but not yet perfectly developed individual in the shape of social duty, family
obligation, communal or national demand, so long as it is not in conflict with his growing sense of the higher
Right. But the sadhaka of the Karmayoga will abandon this also to the Lord of works. After he has made this
surrender, his social impulses and judgments will,
Page 210

like his desires, only be used for their exhaustion or, it may be, so far as they are still necessary for a time to
enable him to identify his lower mental nature with mankind in general or with any grouping of mankind in its
works and hopes and aspirations. But after that brief time is over, they will be withdrawn and a divine
government will alone abide. He will be identified with the Divine and with others only through the divine
consciousness and not through the mental nature.
\par For, even after he is free, the sadhaka will be in the world and to be in the world is to remain in works. But
to remain in works without desire is to act for the good of the world in general or for the kind or the race or for
some new creation to be evolved on the earth or some work imposed by the Divine Will within him. And this
must be done either in the framework provided by the environment or the grouping in which he is born or placed
or else in one which is chosen or created for him by a divine direction. Therefore in our perfection there must be
nothing left in the mental being which conflicts with or prevents our sympathy and free self-identification with the
kind, the group or whatever collective expression of the Divine he is meant to lead, help or serve. But in the end
it must become a free self-identification through identity with the Divine and not a mental bond or moral tie of
union or a vital association dominated by any kind of personal, social, national, communal or credal egoism. If any
social law is obeyed, it will not be from physical necessity or from the sense of personal or general interest or for
expediency or because of the pressure of the environment or from any sense of duty, but solely for the sake of
the Lord of works and because it is felt or known to be the Divine Will that the social law or rule or relation as it
stands can still be kept as a figure of the inner life and the minds of men must not be disturbed by its
infringement. If, on the other hand, the social law, rule or relation is disregarded, that too will not be for the
indulgence of desire, personal will or personal opinion, but because a greater rule is felt that expresses the law of
the Spirit or because it is known that there must be in the march of the divine All-Will a movement towards the
changing, exceeding or
Page 211

abolition of existing laws and forms for the sake of a freer larger life necessary to the world's progress.
\par There is still left the moral law or the ideal and these, even to many who think themselves free, appear for
ever sacred and intangible. But the sadhaka, his gaze turned always to the heights, will abandon them to Him
whom all ideals seek imperfectly and fragmentarily to express; all moral qualities are only a poor and rigid
travesty of his spontaneous and illimitable perfection. The bondage to sin and evil passes away with the passing
of nervous desire; for it belongs to the quality of vital passion, impulsion or drive of propensity in us
(\s{rajogu\,na}) and is extinguished with the transformation of that mode of Nature. But neither must the aspirant
remain subject to the gilded or golden chain of a conventional or a habitual or a mentally ordered or even a high
or clear sattwic virtue. That will be replaced by something profounder and more essential than the minor
inadequate thing that men call virtue. The original sense of the word was manhood and this is a much larger and
deeper thing than the moral mind and its structures. The culmination of Karmayoga is a yet higher and deeper
state that may perhaps be called “soulhood”,—for the soul is greater than the man; a free soulhood
spontaneously welling out in works of a supreme Truth and Love will replace human virtue. But this supreme
Truth cannot be forced to inhabit the petty edifices of the practical reason or even confined in the more dignified
constructions of the larger ideative reason that imposes its representations as if they were pure truth on the
limited human intelligence. This supreme Love will not necessarily be consistent, much less will it be
synonymous, with the partial and feeble, ignorant and emotion-ridden movements of human attraction, sympathy
and pity. The petty law cannot bind the vaster movement; the mind's partial attainment cannot dictate its terms to
the soul's supreme fulfilment.
\par At first, the higher Love and Truth will fulfil its movement in the sadhaka according to the essential law or
way of his own nature. For that is the special aspect of the divine Nature, the particular power of the supreme
Shakti, out of which his soul has emerged into the Play, not limited indeed by the forms of this law
Page 212

or way, for the soul is infinite. But still its stuff of nature bears that stamp, evolves fluently along those lines or
turns around the spiral curves of that dominating influence. He will manifest the divine Truth-movement
according to the temperament of the sage or the lion-like fighter or the lover and enjoyer or the worker and
servant or in any combination of essential attributes (gunas) that may constitute the form given to his being by its
own inner urge. It is this self-nature playing freely in his acts which men will see in him and not a conduct cut,
chalked out, artificially regulated, by any lesser rule or by any law from outside.
\par But there is a yet higher attainment, there is an infinity (\s{\=anantya}) in which even this last limitation is
exceeded, because the nature is utterly fulfilled and its boundaries vanish. There the soul lives without any
boundaries; for it uses all forms and moulds according to the divine Will in it, but it is not restrained, it is not tied
down, it is not imprisoned in any power or form that it uses. This is the summit of the path of works and this the
utter liberty of the soul in its actions. In reality, it has there no actions; for all its activities are a rhythm of the
Supreme and sovereignly proceed from That alone like a spontaneous music out of the Infinite.
\par
\tstar
\par The total surrender, then, of all our actions to a supreme and universal Will, an unconditioned and
standardless surrender of all works to the government of something eternal within us which will replace the
ordinary working of the ego-nature, is the way and end of Karmayoga. But what is this divine supreme Will and
how can it be recognised by our deluded instruments and our blind prisoned intelligence?
\par Ordinarily, we conceive of ourselves as a separate “I” in the universe that governs a separate body and
mental and moral nature, chooses in full liberty its own self-determined actions and is independent and therefore
sole master of its works and responsible. It is not easy for the ordinary mind, the mind that has not thought nor
looked deeply into its own constitution and
Page 213

constituents, it is difficult even for minds that have thought but have no spiritual vision and experience, to imagine
how there can be anything else in us truer, deeper and more powerful than this apparent “I” and its empire. But
the very first step towards self-knowledge as towards the true knowledge of phenomena is to get behind the
apparent truth of things and find the real but masked, essential and dynamic truth which their appearances cover.
\par This ego or “I” is not a lasting truth, much less our essential part; it is only a formation of Nature, a mental
form of thought-centralisation in the perceiving and discriminating mind, a vital form of the centralisation of
feeling and sensation in our parts of life, a form of physical conscious reception centralising substance and
function of substance in our bodies. All that we internally are is not ego, but consciousness, soul or spirit. All that
we externally and superficially are and do is not ego but Nature. An executive cosmic force shapes us and
dictates through our temperament and environment and mentality so shaped, through our individualised
formulation of the cosmic energies, our actions and their results. Truly, we do not think, will or act but thought
occurs in us, will occurs in us, impulse and act occur in us; our ego-sense gathers around itself, refers to itself all
this flow of natural activities. It is cosmic Force, it is Nature that forms the thought, imposes the will, imparts the
impulse. Our body, mind and ego are a wave of that sea of force in action and do not govern it, but by it are
governed and directed. The sadhaka in his progress towards truth and self-knowledge must come to a point
where the soul opens its eyes of vision and recognises this truth of ego and this truth of works. He gives up the
idea of a mental, vital, physical “I” that acts or governs action; he recognises that Prakriti, Force of cosmic
nature following her fixed modes, is the one and only worker in him and in all things and creatures.
\par But what has fixed the modes of Nature? Or who has originated and governs the movements of Force?
There is a Consciousness—or a Conscient—behind that is the lord, witness, knower, enjoyer, upholder and
source of sanction for her works;
Page 214

this consciousness is Soul or Purusha. Prakriti shapes the action in us; Purusha in her or behind her witnesses,
assents, bears and upholds it. Prakriti forms the thought in our minds; Purusha in her or behind her knows the
thought and the truth in it. Prakriti determines the result of the action; Purusha in her or behind her enjoys or
suffers the consequence. Prakriti forms mind and body, labours over them, develops them; Purusha upholds the
formation and evolution and sanctions each step of her works. Prakriti applies the Will-force which works in
things and men; Purusha sets that Will-force to work by his vision of that which should be done. This Purusha is
not the surface ego, but a silent Self, a source of Power, an originator and receiver of Knowledge behind the
ego. Our mental “I” is only a false reflection of this Self, this Power, this Knowledge. This Purusha or supporting
Consciousness is therefore the cause, recipient and support of all Nature's works, but he is not himself the doer.
Prakriti, Nature-Force, in front and Shakti, Conscious-Force, Soul-Force behind her,—for these two are the inner
and outer faces of the universal Mother,—account for all that is done in the universe. The universal Mother,
Prakriti-Shakti, is the one and only worker.
\par Purusha-Prakriti, Consciousness-Force, Soul supporting Nature,—for the two even in their separation are
one and inseparable,—are at once a universal and a transcendent Power. But there is something in the individual
too which is not the mental ego, something that is one in essence with this greater reality: it is a pure reflection or
portion of the one Purusha; it is the Soul Person or the embodied being, the individual self, Jivatman; it is the Self
that seems to limit its power and knowledge so as to support an individual play of transcendent and universal
Nature. In deepest reality the infinitely One is also infinitely multiple; we are not only a reflection or portion of
That but we are That; our spiritual individuality—unlike our ego—does not preclude our universality and
transcendence. But at present the soul or self in us intent on individualisation in Nature allows itself to be
confused with the idea of the ego; it has to get rid of this ignorance, it has to know itself as a reflection or portion
or being of the supreme and universal Self
Page 215

and solely a centre of its consciousness in the world-action. But this Jiva Purusha too is not the doer of works
any more than the ego or the supporting consciousness of the Witness and Knower. Again and always it is the
transcendent and universal Shakti who is the sole doer. But behind her is the one Supreme who manifests
through her as the dual power, Purusha-Prakriti, Ishwara-Shakti.
\note{Ishwara-Shakti is not quite the same as Purusha-Prakriti; for Purusha and Prakriti are separate powers,
but Ishwara and Shakti contain each other. Ishwara is Purusha who contains Prakriti and rules by the power of
the Shakti within him. Shakti is Prakriti ensouled by Purusha and acts by the will of the Ishwara which is her own
will and whose presence in her movement she carries always with her. The Purusha-Prakriti realisation is of the
first utility to the seeker on the Way of Works; for it is the separation of the conscient being and the Energy and
the subjection of the being to the mechanism of the Energy that are the efficient cause of our ignorance and
imperfection; by this realisation the being can liberate himself from the mechanical action of the nature and
become free and arrive at a first spiritual control over the nature. Ishwara-Shakti stands behind the relation of
Purusha-Prakriti and its ignorant action and turns it to an evolutionary purpose. The Ishwara-Shakti realisation
can bring participation in a higher dynamism and a divine working and a total unity and harmony of the being in a
spiritual nature.} The Supreme becomes dynamic as the Shakti and is by her the sole originator and Master of
works in the universe.
\par
\tstar
\par If this is the truth of works, the first thing the sadhaka has to do is to recoil from the egoistic forms of
activity and get rid of the sense of an “I” that acts. He has to see and feel that everything happens in him by the
plastic conscious or subconscious or sometimes superconscious automatism of his mental and bodily instruments
moved by the forces of spiritual, mental, vital and physical Nature. There is a personality on his surface that
chooses and wills, submits and struggles, tries to make good in Nature or prevail over Nature, but this personality
is itself a construction of Nature and so dominated, driven, determined by her that it cannot be free. It is a
formation or expression of the Self in her,—it is a self of Nature rather than a self of Self, his natural and
processive, not his spiritual and permanent being, a temporary constructed personality, not the
Page 216

true immortal Person. It is that Person that he must become. He must succeed in being inwardly quiescent,
detach himself as the observer from the outer active personality and learn the play of the cosmic forces in him by
standing back from all blinding absorption in its turns and movements. Thus calm, detached, a student of himself
and a witness of his nature, he realises that he is the individual soul who observes the works of Nature, accepts
tranquilly her results and sanctions or withholds his sanction from the impulse to her acts. At present this soul or
Purusha is little more than an acquiescent spectator, influencing perhaps the action and development of the being
by the pressure of its veiled consciousness, but for the most part delegating its powers or a fragment of them to
the outer personality,—in fact to Nature, for this outer self is not lord but subject to her, \sforced{an\=i\'sa}; but,
once unveiled, it can make its sanction or refusal effective, become the master of the action, dictate sovereignly
a change of Nature. Even if for a long time, as the result of fixed association and past storage of energy, the
habitual movement takes place independent of the Purusha's assent and even if the sanctioned movement is
persistently refused by Nature for want of past habit, still he will discover that in the end his assent or refusal
prevails,—slowly with much resistance or quickly with a rapid accommodation of her means and tendencies she
modifies herself and her workings in the direction indicated by his inner sight or volition. Thus he learns in place
of mental control or egoistic will an inner spiritual control which makes him master of the Nature-forces that
work in him and not their unconscious instrument or mechanic slave. Above and around him is the Shakti, the
universal Mother and from her he can get all his inmost soul needs and wills if only he has a true knowledge of
her ways and a true surrender to the divine Will in her. Finally, he becomes aware of that highest dynamic Self
within him and within Nature which is the source of all his seeing and knowing, the source of the sanction, the
source of the acceptance, the source of the rejection. This is the Lord, the Supreme, the One-in-all,
Ishwara-Shakti, of whom his soul is a portion, a being of that Being and a power of that Power. The
Page 217

rest of our progress depends on our knowledge of the ways in which the Lord of works manifests his Will in the
world and in us and executes them through the transcendent and universal Shakti.
\par The Lord sees in his omniscience the thing that has to be done. This seeing is his Will, it is a form of creative
Power, and that which he sees the all-conscious Mother, one with him, takes into her dynamic self and embodies,
and executive Nature-Force carries it out as the mechanism of their omnipotent omniscience. But this vision of
what is to be and therefore of what is to be done arises out of the very being, pours directly out of the
consciousness and delight of existence of the Lord, spontaneously, like light from the Sun. It is not our mortal
attempt to see, our difficult arrival at truth of action and motive or just demand of Nature. When the individual
soul is entirely at one in its being and knowledge with the Lord and directly in touch with the original Shakti, the
transcendent Mother, the supreme Will can then arise in us too in the high divine manner as a thing that must be
and is achieved by the spontaneous action of Nature. There is then no desire, no responsibility, no reaction; all
takes place in the peace, calm, light, power of the supporting and enveloping and inhabiting Divine.
\par But even before that highest approach to identity is achieved, something of the supreme Will can manifest in
us as an imperative impulsion, a God-driven action; we then act by a spontaneous self-determining Force but a
fuller knowledge of meaning and aim arises only afterwards. Or the impulse to action may come as an inspiration
or intuition, but rather in the heart and body than in the mind; here an effective sight enters in but the complete
and exact knowledge is still deferred and comes, if at all, later. But the divine Will may descend too as a
luminous single command or a total perception or a continuous current of perception of what is to be done into
the will or into the thought or as a direction from above spontaneously fulfilled by the lower members. When the
Yoga is imperfect, only some actions can be done in this way, or else a general action may so proceed but only
during periods of exaltation and illumination. When the
Page 218

Yoga is perfect, all action becomes of this character. We may indeed distinguish three stages of a growing
progress by which, first, the personal will is occasionally or frequently enlightened or moved by a supreme Will or
conscious Force beyond it, then constantly replaced and, last, identified and merged in that divine Power-action.
The first is the stage when we are still governed by the intellect, heart and senses; these have to seek or wait for
the divine inspiration and guidance and do not always find or receive it. The second is the stage when human
intelligence is more and more replaced by a high illumined or intuitive spiritualised mind, the external human heart
by the inner psychic heart, the senses by a purified and selfless vital force. The third is the stage when we rise
even above spiritualised mind to the supramental levels.
\par In all three stages the fundamental character of the liberated action is the same, a spontaneous working of
Prakriti no longer through or for the ego but at the will and for the enjoyment of the supreme Purusha. At a
higher level this becomes the Truth of the absolute and universal Supreme expressed through the individual soul
and worked out consciously through the nature,—no longer through a half-perception and a diminished or
distorted effectuation by the stumbling, ignorant and all-deforming energy of lower nature in us but by the
all-wise transcendent and universal Mother.
\par The Lord has veiled himself and his absolute wisdom and eternal consciousness in ignorant Nature-Force
and suffers her to drive the individual being, with its complicity, as the ego; this lower action of Nature continues
to prevail, often even in spite of man's half-lit imperfect efforts at a nobler motive and a purer self-knowledge.
Our human effort at perfection fails, or progresses very incompletely, owing to the force of Nature's past actions
in us, her past formations, her long-rooted associations; it turns towards a true and high-climbing success only
when a greater Knowledge and Power than our own breaks through the lid of our ignorance and guides or takes
up our personal will. For our human will is a misled and wandering ray that has parted from the supreme
Puissance. The period of slow emergence out of this lower working into a higher light and
Page 219

purer force is the valley of the shadow of death for the striver after perfection; it is a dreadful passage full of
trials, sufferings, sorrows, obscurations, stumblings, errors, pitfalls. To abridge and alleviate this ordeal or to
penetrate it with the divine delight faith is necessary, an increasing surrender of the mind to the knowledge that
imposes itself from within and, above all, a true aspiration and a right and unfaltering and sincere practice.
“Practise unfalteringly,” says the Gita, “with a heart free from despondency,” the Yoga; for even though in the
earlier stage of the path we drink deep of the bitter poison of internal discord and suffering, the last taste of this
cup is the sweetness of the nectar of immortality and the honey-wine of an eternal Ananda.
Page 220

\par
\hn Chapter IX
\par
\ht Equality and the Annihilation of Ego
\par\drop An entire self-consecration, a complete equality, an unsparing effacement of the ego, a transforming
deliverance of the nature from its ignorant modes of action are the steps by which the surrender of all the being
and nature to the Divine Will can be prepared and achieved,—a self-giving true, total and without reserve. The
first necessity is an entire spirit of self-consecration in our works; it must become first the constant will, then the
ingrained need in all the being, finally its automatic but living and conscious habit, the self-existent turn to do all
action as a sacrifice to the Supreme and to the veiled Power present in us and in all beings and in all the
workings of the universe. Life is the altar of this sacrifice, works are our offering; a transcendent and universal
Power and Presence as yet rather felt or glimpsed than known or seen by us is the Deity to whom they are
offered. This sacrifice, this self-consecration has two sides to it; there is the work itself and there is the spirit in
which it is done, the spirit of worship to the Master of Works in all that we see, think and experience.
\par The work itself is at first determined by the best light we can command in our ignorance. It is that which we
conceive as the thing that should be done. And whether it be shaped by our sense of duty, by our feeling for our
fellow-creatures, by our idea of what is for the good of others or the good of the world or by the direction of one
whom we accept as a human Master, wiser than ourselves and for us the representative of that Lord of all
works in whom we believe but whom we do not yet know, the principle is the same. The essential of the
sacrifice of works must be there and the essential is the surrender of all desire for the fruit of our works, the
renunciation of all attachment to the result for which yet we labour. For so long as we work with attachment to
the result, the sacrifice is offered not to the Divine, but to our ego.
Page 221

We may think otherwise, but we are deceiving ourselves; we are making our idea of the Divine, our sense of
duty, our feeling for our fellow-creatures, our idea of what is good for the world or others, even our obedience to
the Master a mask for our egoistic satisfactions and preferences and a specious shield against the demand made
on us to root all desire out of our nature.
\par At this stage of the Yoga and even throughout the Yoga this form of desire, this figure of the ego is the
enemy against whom we have to be always on our guard with an unsleeping vigilance. We need not be
discouraged when we find him lurking within us and assuming all sorts of disguises, but we should be vigilant to
detect him in all his masks and inexorable in expelling his influence. The illumining Word of this movement is the
decisive line of the Gita, “To action thou hast a right but never under any circumstances to its fruit.” The fruit
belongs solely to the Lord of all works; our only business with it is to prepare success by a true and careful
action and to offer it, if it comes, to the divine Master. Afterwards even as we have renounced attachment to the
fruit, we must renounce attachment to the work also; at any moment we must be prepared to change one work,
one course or one field of action for another or abandon all works if that is the clear command of the Master.
Otherwise we do the act not for his sake but for our satisfaction and pleasure in the work, from the kinetic
nature's need of action or for the fulfilment of our propensities; but these are all stations and refuges of the ego.
However necessary for our ordinary motion of life, they have to be abandoned in the growth of the spiritual
consciousness and replaced by divine counterparts: an Ananda, an impersonal and God-directed delight will cast
out or supplant the unillumined vital satisfaction and pleasure, a joyful driving of the Divine Energy the kinetic
need; the fulfilment of the propensities will no longer be an object or a necessity, there will be instead the
fulfilment of the Divine Will through the natural dynamic truth in action of a free soul and a luminous nature. In
the end, as the attachment to the fruit of the work and to the work itself has been excised from the heart, so also
the last clinging attachment to the idea and sense of ourselves as the doer has to be
Page 222

\NH relinquished; the Divine Shakti must be known and felt above and within us as the true and sole worker.
\par
\tstar
\par The renunciation of attachment to the work and its fruit is the beginning of a wide movement towards an
absolute equality in the mind and soul which must become all-enveloping if we are to be perfect in the spirit. For
the worship of the Master of works demands a clear recognition and glad acknowledgment of him in ourselves,
in all things and in all happenings. Equality is the sign of this adoration; it is the soul's ground on which true
sacrifice and worship can be done. The Lord is there equally in all beings, we have to make no essential
distinctions between ourselves and others, the wise and the ignorant, friend and enemy, man and animal, the saint
and the sinner. We must hate none, despise none, be repelled by none; for in all we have to see the One
disguised or manifested at his pleasure. He is a little revealed in one or more revealed in another or concealed
and wholly distorted in others according to his will and his knowledge of what is best for that which he intends to
become in form in them and to do in works in their nature. All is ourself, one self that has taken many shapes.
Hatred and disliking and scorn and repulsion, clinging and attachment and preference are natural, necessary,
inevitable at a certain stage: they attend upon or they help to make and maintain Nature's choice in us. But to the
Karmayogin they are a survival, a stumbling-block, a process of the Ignorance and, as he progresses, they fall
away from his nature. The child-soul needs them for its growth; but they drop from an adult in the divine culture.
In the God-nature to which we have to rise there can be an adamantine, even a destructive severity but not
hatred, a divine irony but not scorn, a calm, clear-seeing and forceful rejection but not repulsion and dislike. Even
what we have to destroy, we must not abhor or fail to recognise as a disguised and temporary movement of the
Eternal.
\par And since all things are the one Self in its manifestation, we
Page 223

shall have equality of soul towards the ugly and the beautiful, the maimed and the perfect, the noble and the
vulgar, the pleasant and the unpleasant, the good and the evil. Here also there will be no hatred, scorn and
repulsion, but instead the equal eye that sees all things in their real character and their appointed place. For we
shall know that all things express or disguise, develop or distort, as best they can or with whatever defect they
must, under the circumstances intended for them, in the way possible to the immediate status or function or
evolution of their nature, some truth or fact, some energy or potential of the Divine necessary by its presence in
the progressive manifestation both to the whole of the present sum of things and for the perfection of the ultimate
result. That truth is what we must seek and discover behind the transitory expression; undeterred by
appearances, by the deficiencies or the disfigurements of the expression, we can then worship the Divine for
ever unsullied, pure, beautiful and perfect behind his masks. All indeed has to be changed, not ugliness accepted
but divine beauty, not imperfection taken as our resting-place but perfection striven after, the supreme good
made the universal aim and not evil. But what we do has to be done with a spiritual understanding and
knowledge, and it is a divine good, beauty, perfection, pleasure that has to be followed after, not the human
standards of these things. If we have not equality, it is a sign that we are still pursued by the Ignorance, we shall
truly understand nothing and it is more than likely that we shall destroy the old imperfection only to create
another: for we are substituting the appreciations of our human mind and desire-soul for the divine values.
\par Equality does not mean a fresh ignorance or blindness; it does not call for and need not initiate a greyness of
vision and a blotting out of all hues. Difference is there, variation of expression is there and this variation we shall
appreciate,—far more justly than we could when the eye was clouded by a partial and erring love and hate,
admiration and scorn, sympathy and antipathy, attraction and repulsion. But behind the variation we shall always
see the Complete and Immutable who dwells within it and we shall feel, know or at least, if it is
Page 224

hidden from us, trust in the wise purpose and divine necessity of the particular manifestation, whether it appear to
our human standards harmonious and perfect or crude and unfinished or even false and evil.
\par And so too we shall have the same equality of mind and soul towards all happenings, painful or pleasurable,
defeat and success, honour and disgrace, good repute and ill-repute, good fortune and evil fortune. For in all
happenings we shall see the will of the Master of all works and results and a step in the evolving expression of
the Divine. He manifests himself, to those who have the inner eye that sees, in forces and their play and results
as well as in things and in creatures. All things move towards a divine event; each experience, suffering and
want no less than joy and satisfaction, is a necessary link in the carrying out of a universal movement which it is
our business to understand and second. To revolt, to condemn, to cry out is the impulse of our unchastened and
ignorant instincts. Revolt like everything else has its uses in the play and is even necessary, helpful, decreed for
the divine development in its own time and stage; but the movement of an ignorant rebellion belongs to the stage
of the soul's childhood or to its raw adolescence. The ripened soul does not condemn but seeks to understand and
master, does not cry out but accepts or toils to improve and perfect, does not revolt inwardly but labours to obey
and fulfil and transfigure. Therefore we shall receive all things with an equal soul from the hands of the Master.
Failure we shall admit as a passage as calmly as success until the hour of the divine victory arrives. Our souls
and minds and bodies will remain unshaken by acutest sorrow and suffering and pain if in the divine dispensation
they come to us, unoverpowered by intensest joy and pleasure. Thus supremely balanced we shall continue
steadily on our way meeting all things with an equal calm until we are ready for a more exalted status and can
enter into the supreme and universal Ananda.
\par
\tstar
Page 225

\par This equality cannot come except by a protracted ordeal and patient self-discipline; so long as desire is
strong, equality cannot come at all except in periods of quiescence and the fatigue of desire, and it is then more
likely to be an inert indifference or desire's recoil from itself than the true calm and the positive spiritual oneness.
Moreover, this discipline or this growth into equality of spirit has its necessary epochs and stages. Ordinarily we
have to begin with a period of endurance; for we must learn to confront, to suffer and to assimilate all contacts.
Each fibre in us must be taught not to wince away from that which pains and repels and not to run eagerly
towards that which pleases and attracts, but rather to accept, to face, to bear and to conquer. All touches we
must be strong to bear, not only those that are proper and personal to us but those born of our sympathy or our
conflict with the worlds around, above or below us and with their peoples. We shall endure tranquilly the action
and impact on us of men and things and forces, the pressure of the Gods and the assaults of Titans; we shall
face and engulf in the unstirred seas of our spirit all that can possibly come to us down the ways of the soul's
infinite experience. This is the stoical period of the preparation of equality, its most elementary and yet its heroic
age. But this steadfast endurance of the flesh and heart and mind must be reinforced by a sustained sense of
spiritual submission to a divine Will: this living clay must yield not only with a stern or courageous acquiescence,
but with knowledge or with resignation, even in suffering, to the touch of the divine Hand that is preparing its
perfection. A sage, a devout or even a tender stoicism of the God-lover is possible, and these are better than the
merely pagan self-reliant endurance which may lend itself to a too great hardening of the vessel of God: for this
kind prepares the strength that is capable of wisdom and of love; its tranquillity is a deeply moved calm that
passes easily into bliss. The gain of this period of resignation and endurance is the soul's strength equal to all
shocks and contacts.
\par There is next a period of high-seated impartiality and indifference in which the soul becomes free from
exultation and depression and escapes from the snare of the eagerness of joy as
Page 226

from the dark net of the pangs of grief and suffering. All things and persons and forces, all thoughts and feelings
and sensations and actions, one's own no less than those of others, are regarded from above by a spirit that
remains intact and immutable and is not disturbed by these things. This is the philosophic period of the
preparation of equality, a wide and august movement. But indifference must not settle into an inert turning away
from action and experience; it must not be an aversion born of weariness, disgust and distaste, a recoil of
disappointed or satiated desire, the sullenness of a baffled and dissatisfied egoism forced back from its passionate
aims. These recoils come inevitably in the unripe soul and may in some way help the progress by a
discouragement of the eager desire-driven vital nature, but they are not the perfection towards which we labour.
The indifference or the impartiality that we must seek after is a calm superiority of the high-seated soul above
the contacts of things;
\note{\s{ud\=as\=ina}.} it regards and accepts or rejects them but is not moved in the rejection and is not subjected
by the acceptance. It begins to feel itself near, kin to, one with a silent Self and Spirit self-existent and separate
from the workings of Nature which it supports and makes possible, part of or merged in the motionless calm
Reality that transcends the motion and action of the universe. The gain of this period of high transcendence is the
soul's peace unrocked and unshaken by the pleasant ripplings or by the tempestuous waves and billows of the
world's movement.
\par If we can pass through these two stages of the inner change without being arrested or fixed in either, we
are admitted to a greater divine equality which is capable of a spiritual ardour and tranquil passion of delight, a
rapturous, all-understanding and all-possessing equality of the perfected soul, an intense and even wideness and
fullness of its being embracing all things. This is the supreme period and the passage to it is through the joy of a
total self-giving to the Divine and to the universal Mother. For strength is then crowned by a happy mastery,
peace deepens into bliss, the possession of the divine calm is uplifted
Page 227

and made the ground for the possession of the divine movement. But if this greater perfection is to arrive, the
soul's impartial high-seatedness looking down from above on the flux of forms and personalities and movements
and forces must be modified and change into a new sense of strong and calm submission and a powerful and
intense surrender. This submission will be no longer a resigned acquiescence but a glad acceptance: for there will
be no sense of suffering or of the bearing of a burden or cross; love and delight and the joy of self-giving will be
its brilliant texture. And this surrender will be not only to a divine Will which we perceive and accept and obey,
but to a divine Wisdom in the Will which we recognise and a divine Love in it which we feel and rapturously
suffer, the wisdom and love of a supreme Spirit and Self of ourselves and all with which we can achieve a happy
and perfect unity. A lonely power, peace and stillness is the last word of the philosophic equality of the sage; but
the soul in its integral experience liberates itself from this self-created status and enters into the sea of a supreme
and all-embracing ecstasy of the beginningless and endless beatitude of the Eternal. Then we are at last capable
of receiving all contacts with a blissful equality, because we feel in them the touch of the imperishable Love and
Delight, the happiness absolute that hides ever in the heart of things. The gain of this culmination in a universal
and equal rapture is the soul's delight and the opening gates of the Bliss that is infinite, the Joy that surpasses all
understanding.
\par
\tstar
\par Before this labour for the annihilation of desire and the conquest of the soul's equality can come to its
absolute perfection and fruition, that turn of the spiritual movement must have been completed which leads to the
abolition of the sense of ego. But for the worker the renunciation of the egoism of action is the most important
element in this change. For even when by giving up the fruits and the desire of the fruits to the Master of the
Sacrifice we have parted with the egoism of rajasic desire, we
Page 228

may still have kept the egoism of the worker. Still we are subject to the sense that we are ourselves the doer of
the act, ourselves its source and ourselves the giver of the sanction. It is still the “I” that chooses and determines,
it is still the “I” that undertakes the responsibility and feels the demerit or the merit.
\par An entire removal of this separative ego-sense is an essential aim of our Yoga. If any ego is to remain in us
for a while, it is only a form of it which knows itself to be a form and is ready to disappear as soon as a true
centre of consciousness is manifested or built in us. That true centre is a luminous formulation of the one
Consciousness and a pure channel and instrument of the one Existence. A support for the individual
manifestation and action of the universal Force, it gradually reveals behind it the true Person in us, the central
eternal being, an everlasting being of the Supreme, a power and portion of the transcendent Shakti.
\note{\s{a\.m\'sa\,h san\=atana\,h}, \s{par\=a prak\,rtir j\=ivabh\=ut\=a}.}
\par Here too, in this movement by which the soul divests itself gradually of the obscure robe of the ego, there is
a progress by marked stages. For not only the fruit of works belongs to the Lord alone, but our works also must
be his; he is the true lord of our actions no less than of our results. This we must not see with the thinking mind
only, it must become entirely true to our entire consciousness and will. The sadhaka has not only to think and
know but to see and feel concretely and intensely even in the moment of the working and in its initiation and
whole process that his works are not his at all, but are coming through him from the Supreme Existence. He
must be always aware of a Force, a Presence, a Will that acts through his individual nature. But there is in taking
this turn the danger that he may confuse his own disguised or sublimated ego or an inferior power with the Lord
and substitute its demands for the supreme dictates. He may fall into a common ambush of this lower nature and
distort his supposed surrender to a higher Power into an excuse for a magnified and uncontrolled indulgence of
his own self-will and even of his desires and passions. A great sincerity is asked for and has to be imposed not
only on the conscious mind but
Page 229

still more on the subliminal part of us which is full of hidden movements. For there is there, especially in our
subliminal vital nature, an incorrigible charlatan and actor. The sadhaka must first have advanced far in the
elimination of desire and in the firm equality of his soul towards all workings and all happenings before he can
utterly lay down the burden of his works on the Divine. At every moment he must proceed with a vigilant eye
upon the deceits of the ego and the ambushes of the misleading Powers of Darkness who ever represent
themselves as the one Source of Light and Truth and take on them a simulacrum of divine forms in order to
capture the soul of the seeker.
\par Immediately he must take the further step of relegating himself to the position of the Witness. Aloof from
the Prakriti, \NH impersonal and dispassionate, he must watch the executive Nature-Force at work within him
and understand its action; he must learn by this separation to recognise the play of her universal forces,
distinguish her interweaving of light and night, the divine and the undivine, and detect her formidable Powers and
Beings that use the ignorant human creature. Nature works in us, says the Gita, through the triple quality of
Prakriti, the quality of light and good, the quality of passion and desire and the quality of obscurity and inertia.
The seeker must learn to distinguish, as an impartial and discerning witness of all that proceeds within this
kingdom of his nature, the separate and the combined action of these qualities; he must pursue the workings of
the cosmic forces in him through all the labyrinth of their subtle unseen processes and disguises and know every
intricacy of the maze. As he proceeds in this knowledge, he will be able to become the giver of the sanction and
no longer remain an ignorant tool of Nature. At first he must induce the Nature-Force in its action on his
instruments to subdue the working of its two lower qualities and bring them into subjection to the quality of light
and good and, afterwards, he must persuade that again to offer itself so that all three may be transformed by a
higher Power into their divine equivalents, supreme repose and calm, divine illumination and bliss, the eternal
divine dynamis, Tapas. The first part of this discipline and change can be firmly
Page 230

done in principle by the will of the mental being in us; but its full execution and the subsequent transformation can
be done only when the deeper psychic soul increases its hold on the nature and replaces the mental being as its
ruler. When this happens, he will be ready to make, not only with an aspiration and intention and an initial and
progressive self-abandonment but with the most intense actuality of dynamic self-giving, the complete
renunciation of his works to the Supreme Will. By degrees his mind of an imperfect human intelligence will be
replaced by a spiritual and illumined mind and that can in the end enter into the supramental Truth-Light; he will
then no longer act from his nature of the Ignorance with its three modes of confused and imperfect activity, but
from a diviner nature of spiritual calm, light, power and bliss. He will act not from an amalgam of an ignorant
mind and will with the drive of a still more ignorant heart of emotion and the desire of the life-being and the urge
and instinct of the flesh, but first from a spiritualised self and nature and, last, from a supramental
Truth-consciousness and its divine force of supernature.
\par Thus are made possible the final steps when the veil of Nature is withdrawn and the seeker is face to face
with the Master of all existence and his activities are merged in the action of a supreme Energy which is pure,
true, perfect and blissful for ever. Thus can he utterly renounce to the supramental Shakti his works as well as
the fruits of his works and act only as the conscious instrument of the eternal Worker. No longer giving the
sanction, he will rather receive in his instruments and follow in her hands a divine mandate. No longer doing
works, he will accept their execution through him by her unsleeping Force. No longer willing the fulfilment of his
own mental constructions and the satisfaction of his own emotional desires, he will obey and participate in an
omnipotent Will that is also an omniscient Knowledge and a mysterious, magical and unfathomable Love and a
vast bottomless sea of the eternal Bliss of Existence.
Page 231

\par
\hn Chapter X
\par
\ht The Three Modes of Nature
\par\drop To transcend the natural action of the lower Prakriti is indispensable to the soul, if it is to be free in its
self and free in its works. Harmonious subjection to this actual universal Nature, a condition of good and perfect
work for the natural instruments, is not an ideal for the soul, which should rather be subject to God and his Shakti,
but master of its own nature. As agent or as channel of the Supreme Will it must determine by its vision and
sanction or refusal the use that shall be made of the storage of energy, the conditions of environment, the rhythm
of combined movement which are provided by Prakriti for the labour of the natural instruments, mind, life and
body. But this inferior Nature can only be mastered if she is surmounted and used from above. And this can only
be done by a transcendence of her forces, qualities and modes of action; otherwise we are subject to her
conditions and helplessly dominated by her, not free in the spirit.
\par The idea of the three essential modes of Nature is a creation of the ancient Indian thinkers and its truth is
not at once obvious, because it was the result of long psychological experiment and profound internal experience.
Therefore without a long inner experience, without intimate self-observation and intuitive perception of the
Nature-forces it is difficult to grasp accurately or firmly utilise. Still certain broad indications may help the seeker
on the Way of Works to understand, analyse and control by his assent or refusal the combinations of his own
nature. These modes are termed in the Indian books qualities, \s{gu\,nas}, and are given the names \s{sattva},
\s{rajas}, \s{tamas}. Sattwa is the force of equilibrium and translates in quality as good and harmony and
happiness and light; rajas is the force of kinesis and translates in quality as struggle and effort, passion and
action; tamas is the force of inconscience and inertia and translates in quality
Page 232

as obscurity and incapacity and inaction. Ordinarily used for psychological self-analysis, these distinctions are
valid also in physical Nature. Each thing and every existence in the lower Prakriti contains them and its process
and dynamic form are the result of the interaction of these qualitative powers.
\par Every form of things, whether animate or inanimate, is a constantly maintained poise of natural forces in
motion and is subject to an unending stream of helpful, disturbing or disintegrating contacts from other
combinations of forces that surround it. Our own nature of mind, life and body is nothing else than such a
formative combination and poise. In the reception of the environing contacts and the reaction to them the three
modes determine the temper of the recipient and the character of the response. Inert and inapt, he may suffer
them without any responsive reaction, any motion of self-defence or any capacity of assimilation and adjustment;
this is the mode of tamas, the way of inertia. The stigmata of tamas are blindness and unconsciousness and
incapacity and unintelligence, sloth and indolence and inactivity and mechanical routine and the mind's torpor and
the life's sleep and the soul's slumber. Its effect, if uncorrected by other elements, can be nothing but
disintegration of the form or the poise of the nature without any new creation or new equilibrium or force of
kinetic progress. At the heart of this inert impotence is the principle of ignorance and an inability or slothful
unwillingness to comprehend, seize and manage the stimulating or assailing contact, the suggestion of environing
forces and their urge towards fresh experience.
\par On the other hand, the recipient of Nature's contacts, touched and stimulated, solicited or assailed by her
forces, may react to the pressure or against it. She allows, encourages, impels him to strive, to resist, to attempt,
to dominate or engross his environment, to assert his will, to fight and create and conquer. This is the mode of
rajas, the way of passion and action and the thirst of desire. Struggle and change and new creation, victory and
defeat and joy and suffering and hope and disappointment are its children and build the many-coloured house of
life in which it takes its pleasure. But its knowledge is an imperfect
Page 233

or a false knowledge and brings with it ignorant effort, error, a constant misadjustment, pain of attachment,
disappointed desire, grief of loss and failure. The gift of rajas is kinetic force, energy, activity, the power that
creates and acts and can overcome; but it moves in the wrong lights or the half-lights of the Ignorance and it is
perverted by the touch of the Asura, Rakshasa and Pishacha. The arrogant ignorance of the human mind and its
self-satisfied perversions and presumptuous errors, the pride and vanity and ambition, the cruelty and tyranny and
beast wrath and violence, the selfishness and baseness and hypocrisy and treachery and vile meanness, the lust
and greed and rapacity, the jealousy, envy and bottomless ingratitude that disfigure the earth-nature are the
natural children of this indispensable but strong and dangerous turn of Nature.
\par But the embodied being is not limited to these two modes of Prakriti; there is a better and more enlightened
way in which he can deal with surrounding impacts and the stream of the world-forces. There is possible a
reception and reaction with clear comprehension, poise and balance. This way of natural being has the power
that, because it understands, sympathises; it fathoms and controls and develops Nature's urge and her ways: it
has an intelligence that penetrates her processes and her significances and can assimilate and utilise; there is a
lucid response that is not overpowered but adjusts, corrects, adapts, harmonises, elicits the best in all things. This
is the mode of sattwa, the turn of Nature that is full of light and poise, directed to good, to knowledge, to delight
and beauty, to happiness, right understanding, right equilibrium, right order: its temperament is the opulence of a
bright clearness of knowledge and a lucent warmth of sympathy and closeness. A fineness and enlightenment, a
governed energy, an accomplished harmony and poise of the whole being is the consummate achievement of the
sattwic nature.
\par No existence is cast entirely in the single mould of any of these three modes of the cosmic Force; all three
are present in \NH everyone and everywhere. There is a constant combining and separation of their shifting
relations and interpenetrating
Page 234

\NH influences, often a conflict, a wrestling of forces, a struggle to dominate each other. All have in great or in
small extent or degree, even if sometimes in a hardly appreciable minimum, their sattwic states and clear tracts
or inchoate tendencies of light, clarity and happiness, fine adaptation and sympathy with the environment,
intelligence, poise, right mind, right will and feeling, right impulse, virtue, order. All have their rajasic moods and
impulses and turbid parts of desire and passion and struggle, perversion and falsehood and error, unbalanced joy
and sorrow, aggressive push to work and eager creation and strong or bold or fiery or fierce reactions to the
pressure of the environment and to life's assaults and offers. All have their tamasic states and constant obscure
parts, their moments or points of unconsciousness, their long habit or their temporary velleities of weak
resignation or dull acceptance, their constitutional feeblenesses or movements of fatigue, negligence and
indolence and their lapses into ignorance and incapacity, depression and fear and cowardly recoil or submission
to the environment and to the pressure of men and events and forces. Each one of us is sattwic in some
directions of his energy of Nature or in some parts of his mind or character, in others rajasic, tamasic in others.
According as one or other of the modes usually dominates his general temperament and type of mind and turn of
action, it is said of him that he is the sattwic, the rajasic or the tamasic man; but few are always of one kind and
none is entire in his kind. The wise are not always or wholly wise, the intelligent are intelligent only in patches;
the saint suppresses in himself many unsaintly movements and the evil are not entirely evil: the dullest has his
unexpressed or unused and undeveloped capacities, the most timorous his moments or his way of courage, the
helpless and the weakling a latent part of strength in his nature. The dominant gunas are not the essential
soul-type of the embodied being but only the index of the formation he has made for this life or during his present
existence and at a given moment of his evolution in Time.
\par
\tstar
Page 235

\par When the sadhaka has once stood back from the action of Prakriti within him or upon him and, not
interfering, not amending or inhibiting, not choosing or deciding, allowed its play and analysed and watched the
process, he soon discovers that her modes are self-dependent and work as a machine once put in action works
by its own structure and propelling forces. The force and the propulsion come from Prakriti and not from the
creature. Then he realises how mistaken was his impression that his mind was the doer of his works; his mind
was only a small part of him and a creation and engine of Nature. Nature was acting all the while in her own
modes moving the three general qualities about as a girl might play with her puppets. His ego was all along a tool
and plaything; his character and intelligence, his moral qualities and mental powers, his creations and works and
exploits, his anger and forbearance, his cruelty and mercy, his love and his hatred, his sin and his virtue, his light
and his darkness, his passion of joy and his anguish of sorrow were the play of Nature to which the soul,
attracted, won and subjected, lent its passive concurrence. And yet the determinism of Nature or Force is not all;
the soul has a word to say in the matter,—but the secret soul, the Purusha, not the mind or the ego, since these
are not independent entities, they are parts of Nature. For the soul's sanction is needed for the play and by an
inner silent will as the lord and giver of the sanction it can determine the principle of the play and intervene in its
combinations, although the execution in thought and will and act and impulse must still be Nature's part and
privilege. The Purusha can dictate a harmony for Nature to execute, not by interfering in her functions but by a
conscious regard on her which she transmutes at once or after much difficulty into translating idea and dynamic
impetus and significant figure.
\par An escape from the action of the two inferior gunas is very evidently indispensable if we are to transmute
our present nature into a power and form of the divine consciousness and an instrument of its forces. Tamas
obscures and prevents the light of the divine knowledge from penetrating into the dark and dull corners of our
nature. Tamas incapacitates and takes away the
Page 236

power to respond to divine impulse and the energy to change and the will to progress and make ourselves plastic
to a greater Shakti. Rajas perverts knowledge, makes our reason the accomplice of falsehood and the abettor of
every wrong movement, disturbs and twists our life-force and its impulses, oversets the balance and health of the
body. Rajas captures all high-born ideas and high-seated movements and turns them to a false and egoistic use;
even divine Truth and divine influences, when they descend into the earthly plane, cannot escape this misuse and
seizure. Tamas unenlightened and rajas unconverted, no divine change or divine life is possible.
\par An exclusive resort to sattwa would seem to be the way of escape: but there is this difficulty that no one of
the qualities can prevail by itself against its two companions and rivals. If, envisaging the quality of desire and
passion as the cause of disturbance, suffering, sin and sorrow, we strain and labour to quell and subdue it, rajas
sinks but tamas rises. For, the principle of activity dulled, inertia takes its place. A quiet peace, happiness,
knowledge, love, right sentiment can be founded by the principle of light, but, if rajas is absent or completely
suppressed, the quiet in the soul tends to become a tranquillity of inaction, not the firm ground of a dynamic
change. Ineffectively right-thinking, right-doing, good, mild and even, the nature may become in its dynamic parts
sattwa-tamasic, neutral, pale-tinted, uncreative or emptied of power. Mental and moral obscurity may be absent,
but so are the intense springs of action, and this is a hampering limitation and another kind of incompetence. For
tamas is a double principle; it contradicts rajas by inertia, it contradicts sattwa by narrowness, obscurity and
ignorance and, if either is depressed, it pours in to occupy its place.
\par If we call in rajas again to correct this error and bid it ally itself to sattwa and by their united agency
endeavour to get rid of the dark principle, we find that we have elevated our action, but that there is again
subjection to rajasic eagerness, passion, disappointment, suffering, anger. These movements may be more
exalted in their scope and spirit and action than before, but they are not the peace, the freedom, the power, the
self-mastery
Page 237

at which we long to arrive. Wherever desire and ego harbour, passion and disturbance harbour with them and
share their life. And if we seek a compromise between the three modes, sattwa leading, the others subordinate,
still we have only arrived at a more temperate action of the play of Nature. A new poise has been reached, but a
spiritual freedom and mastery are not in sight or else are still only a far-off prospect.
\par A radically different movement has to draw us back from the gunas and lift us above them. The error that
accepts the action of the modes of Nature must cease; for as long as it is accepted, the soul is involved in their
operations and subjected to their law. Sattwa must be transcended as well as rajas and tamas; the golden chain
must be broken no less than the leaden fetters and the bond-ornaments of a mixed alloy. The Gita prescribes to
this end a new method of self-discipline. It is to stand back in oneself from the action of the modes and observe
this unsteady flux as the Witness seated above the surge of the forces of Nature. He is one who watches but is
impartial and indifferent, aloof from them on their own level and in his native posture high above them. As they
rise and fall in their waves, the Witness looks, observes, but neither accepts nor for the moment interferes with
their course. First there must be the freedom of the impersonal Witness; afterwards there can be the control of
the Master, the Ishwara.
\par
\tstar
\par The initial advantage of this process of detachment is that one begins to understand one's own nature and all
Nature. The detached Witness is able to see entirely without the least blinding by egoism the play of her modes
of the Ignorance and to pursue it into all its ramifications, coverings and subtleties—for it is full of camouflage
and disguise and snare and treachery and ruse. Instructed by long experience, conscious of all act and condition
as their interaction, made wise of their processes, he cannot any longer be overcome by their assaults, surprised
in their nets or deceived by their disguises. At the same time he perceives the ego
Page 238

to be nothing better than a device and the sustaining knot of their interaction and, perceiving it, he is delivered
from the illusion of the lower egoistic Nature. He escapes from the sattwic egoism of the altruist and the saint
and the thinker; he shakes off from its control on his life-impulses the rajasic egoism of the self-seeker and
ceases to be the laborious caterer of self-interest and the pampered prisoner or toiling galley-slave of passion and
desire; he slays with the light of knowledge the tamasic egoism of the ignorant or passive being, dull, unintelligent,
attached to the common round of human life. Thus convinced and conscious of the essential vice of the
ego-sense in all our personal action, he seeks no longer to find a means of self-correction and self-liberation in
the rajasic or sattwic ego but looks above, beyond the instruments and the working of Nature, to the Master of
works alone and his supreme Shakti, the supreme Prakriti. There alone all the being is pure and free and the rule
of a divine Truth possible.
\par In this progression the first step is a certain detached superiority to the three modes of Nature. The soul is
inwardly separated and free from the lower Prakriti, not involved in its coils, indifferent and glad above it. Nature
continues to act in the triple round of her ancient habits,—desire, grief and joy attack the heart, the instruments
fall into inaction and obscurity and weariness, light and peace come back into the heart and mind and body; but
the soul stands unchanged and untouched by these changes. Observing and unmoved by the grief and desire of
the lower members, smiling at their joys and their strainings, regarding and unoverpowered by the failing and the
darknesses of the thought and the wildness or the weaknesses of the heart and nerves, uncompelled and
unattached to the mind's illuminations and its relief and sense of ease or of power in the return of light and
gladness, it throws itself into none of these things, but waits unmoved for the intimations of a higher Will and the
intuitions of a greater luminous knowledge. Thus doing always, it becomes eventually free even in its nature parts
from the strife of the three modes and their insufficient values and imprisoning limits. For now this lower Prakriti
feels progressively a compulsion from a higher Shakti. The old habits to which it
Page 239

clung receive no further sanction and begin steadily to lose their frequency and force of recurrence. At last it
understands that it is called to a higher action and a better state and, however slowly, however reluctantly, with
whatever initial or prolonged ill-will and stumbling ignorance, it submits, turns and prepares itself for the change.
\par The static freedom of the soul, no longer witness only and knower, is crowned by a dynamic transformation
of the nature. The constant mixture, the uneven operation of the three modes acting upon each other in our three
instruments ceases from its normal confused, troubled and improper action and movement. Another action
becomes possible, commences, grows, culminates, a working more truly right, more luminous, natural and normal
to the deepest divine interplay of Purusha and Prakriti although supernatural and supernormal to our present
imperfect nature. The body conditioning the physical mind insists no longer on its tamasic inertia that repeats
always the same ignorant movement: it becomes a passive field and instrument of a greater force and light, it
responds to every demand of the spirit's force, holds and supports every variety and intensity of new divine
experience. Our kinetic and dynamic vital parts, our nervous and emotional and sensational and volitional being,
expand in power and admit a tireless action and a blissful enjoyment of experience, but learn at the same time to
stand on a foundation of wide self-possessed and self-poised calm, sublime in force, divine in rest, neither
exulting and excited nor tortured by sorrow and pain, neither harried by desire and importunate impulses nor
dulled by incapacity and indolence. The intelligence, the thinking, understanding and reflective mind, renounces its
sattwic limitations and opens to an essential light and peace. An infinite knowledge offers to us its splendid
ranges, a knowledge not made up of mental constructions, not bound by opinion and idea or dependent on a
stumbling uncertain logic and the petty support of the senses, but self-sure, authentic, all-penetrating,
all-comprehending; a boundless bliss and peace, not dependent on deliverance from the hampered strenuousness
of creative energy and dynamic action, not constituted by a
Page 240

few limited felicities but self-existent and all-including, pour into ever-enlarging fields and through ever-widening
and always more numerous channels to possess the nature. A higher force, bliss and knowledge from a source
beyond mind and life and body seize on them to remould in a diviner image.
\par Here the disharmonies of the triple mode of our inferior existence are overpassed and there begins a greater
triple mode of a divine Nature. There is no obscurity of tamas or inertia. Tamas is replaced by a divine peace
and tranquil eternal repose out of which is released from a supreme matrix of calm concentration the play of
action and knowledge. There is no rajasic kinesis, no desire, no joyful and sorrowful striving of action, creation
and possession, no fruitful chaos of troubled impulse. Rajas is replaced by a self-possessed power and illimitable
act of force, that even in its most violent intensities does not shake the immovable poise of the soul or stain the
vast and profound heavens and luminous abysses of its peace. There is no constructing light of mind casting
about to seize and imprison the Truth, no insecure or inactive ease. Sattwa is replaced by an illumination and a
spiritual bliss identical with the depth and infinite existence of the soul and instinct with a direct and authentic
knowledge that springs straight from the veiled glories of the secret Omniscience.
\par This is the greater consciousness into which our inferior consciousness has to be transformed, this nature of
the Ignorance with its unquiet unbalanced activity of the three modes changed into this greater luminous
supernature. At first we become free from the three gunas, detached, untroubled, \s{nistraigu\,nya}; but this is the
recovery of the native state of the soul, the self, the spirit free and watching in its motionless calm the motion of
Prakriti in her force of the Ignorance. If on this basis the nature, the motion of Prakriti, is also to become free, it
must be by a quiescence of action in a luminous peace and silence in which all necessary movements are done
without any conscious reaction or participation or initiation of action by the mind or by the life-being, without any
ripple of thought or eddy of the vital parts: it must be done under the impulsion, by the initiation, by the
Page 241

working of an impersonal cosmic or a transcendent Force. A cosmic Mind, Life, Substance must act, or a pure
transcendent Self-Power and Bliss other than our own personal being or its building of Nature. This is a state of
freedom which can come in the Yoga of works through renunciation of ego and desire and personal initiation and
the surrender of the being to the cosmic Self or to the universal Shakti; it can come in the Yoga of knowledge by
the cessation of thought, the silence of the mind, the opening of the whole being to the cosmic Consciousness, to
the cosmic Self, the cosmic Dynamis or to the supreme Reality; it can come in the Yoga of devotion by the
surrender of the heart and the whole nature into the hands of the All-Blissful as the adored Master of our
existence. But the culminating change intervenes by a more positive and dynamic transcendence: there is a
transference or transmutation into a superior spiritual status, \s{trigu\,n\=at\=ita}, in which we participate in a greater
spiritual dynamisation; for the three lower unequal modes pass into an equal triune mode of eternal calm, light
and force, the repose, kinesis, illumination of the divine Nature.
\par This supreme harmony cannot come except by the cessation of egoistic will and choice and act and the
quiescence of our limited intelligence. The individual ego must cease to strive, the mind fall silent, the desire-will
learn not to initiate. Our personality must join its source and all thought and initiation come from above. The
secret Master of our activities will be slowly unveiled to us and from the security of the supreme Will and
Knowledge give the sanction to the Divine Shakti who will do all works in us with a purified and exalted nature
for her instrument; the individual centre of personality will be only the upholder of her works here, their recipient
and channel, the reflector of her power and luminous participator in her light, joy and force. Acting it will not act
and no reaction of the lower Prakriti will touch it. The transcendence of the three modes of Nature is the first
condition, their transformation the decisive step of this change by which the Way of Works climbs out of the pit
of narrowness of our darkened human nature into the unwalled wideness of the Truth and Light above us.
Page 242

\par
\hn Chapter XI
\par
\ht The Master of the Work
\par\drop The Master and Mover of our works is the One, the Universal and Supreme, the Eternal and Infinite.
He is the transcendent unknown or unknowable Absolute, the unexpressed and unmanifested Ineffable above us;
but he is also the Self of all beings, the Master of all worlds, transcending all worlds, the Light and the Guide, the
All-Beautiful and All-Blissful, the Beloved and the Lover. He is the Cosmic Spirit and all-creating Energy around
us; he is the Immanent within us. All that is is he, and he is the More than all that is, and we ourselves, though
we know it not, are being of his being, force of his force, conscious with a consciousness derived from his; even
our mortal existence is made out of his substance and there is an immortal within us that is a spark of the Light
and Bliss that are for ever. No matter whether by knowledge, works, love or any other means, to become aware
of this truth of our being, to realise it, to make it effective here or elsewhere is the object of all Yoga.
\par
\tstar
\par But the passage is long and the labour arduous before we can look on him with eyes that see true, and still
longer and more arduous must be our endeavour if we would rebuild ourselves in his true image. The Master of
the work does not reveal himself at once to the seeker. Always it is his Power that acts behind the veil, but it is
manifest only when we renounce the egoism of the worker, and its direct movement increases in proportion as
that renunciation becomes more and more complete. Only when our surrender to his Divine Shakti is absolute,
shall we have the right to live in his absolute presence. And only then can we see our work throw itself naturally,
completely and simply into the mould of the Divine Will.
Page 243

\par There must, therefore, be stages and gradations in our approach to this perfection, as there are in the
progress towards all other perfection on any plane of Nature. The vision of the full glory may come to us before,
suddenly or slowly, once or often, but until the foundation is complete, it is a summary and concentrated, not a
durable and all-enveloping experience, not a lasting presence. The amplitudes, the infinite contents of the Divine
Revelation come afterwards and unroll gradually their power and their significance. Or, even, the steady vision
can be there on the summits of our nature, but the perfect response of the lower members comes only by
degrees. In all Yoga the first requisites are faith and patience. The ardours of the heart and the violences of the
eager will that seek to take the kingdom of heaven by storm can have miserable reactions if they disdain to
support their vehemence on these humbler and quieter auxiliaries. And in the long and difficult integral Yoga
there must be an integral faith and an unshakable patience.
\par It is difficult to acquire or to practise this faith and steadfastness on the rough and narrow path of Yoga
because of the impatience of both heart and mind and the eager but soon faltering will of our rajasic nature. The
vital nature of man hungers always for the fruit of its labour and, if the fruit appears to be denied or long delayed,
he loses faith in the ideal and in the guidance. For his mind judges always by the appearance of things, since that
is the first ingrained habit of the intellectual reason in which he so inordinately trusts. Nothing is easier for us than
to accuse God in our hearts when we suffer long or stumble in the darkness or to abjure the ideal that we have
set before us. For we say, “I have trusted to the Highest and I am betrayed into suffering and sin and error.” Or
else, “I have staked my whole life on an idea which the stern facts of experience contradict and discourage. It
would have been better to be as other men are who accept their limitations and walk on the firm ground of
normal experience.” In such moments—and they are sometimes frequent and long—all the higher experience is
forgotten and the heart concentrates itself in its own bitterness. It is in these dark passages that it is possible to
fall for good or to turn back from the divine labour.
Page 244

\par If one has walked long and steadily in the path, the faith of the heart will remain under the fiercest adverse
pressure; even if it is concealed or apparently overborne, it will take the first opportunity to re-emerge. For
something higher than either heart or intellect upholds it in spite of the worst stumblings and through the most
prolonged failure. But even to the experienced sadhaka such falterings or overcloudings bring a retardation of his
progress and they are exceedingly dangerous to the novice. It is therefore necessary from the beginning to
understand and accept the arduous difficulty of the path and to feel the need of a faith which to the intellect may
seem blind, but yet is wiser than our reasoning intelligence. For this faith is a support from above; it is the brilliant
shadow thrown by a secret light that exceeds the intellect and its data; it is the heart of a hidden knowledge that
is not at the mercy of immediate appearances. Our faith, persevering, will be justified in its works and will be
lifted and transfigured at last into the self-revelation of a divine knowledge. Always we must adhere to the
injunction of the Gita, “Yoga must be continually applied with a heart free from despondent sinking.” Always we
must repeat to the doubting intellect the promise of the Master, “I will surely deliver thee from all sin and evil; do
not grieve.” At the end, the flickerings of faith will cease; for we shall see his face and feel always the Divine
Presence.
\par
\tstar
\par The Master of our works respects our nature even when he is transforming it; he works always through the
nature and not by any arbitrary caprice. This imperfect nature of ours contains the materials of our perfection,
but inchoate, distorted, misplaced, thrown together in disorder or a poor imperfect order. All this material has to
be patiently perfected, purified, reorganised, new-moulded and transformed, not hacked and hewn and slain or
mutilated, not obliterated by simple coercion and denial. This world and we who live in it are his creation and
manifestation, and he deals with it and us in a way our narrow
Page 245

and \NH ignorant mind cannot understand unless it falls silent and opens to a divine knowledge. In our errors is
the substance of a truth which labours to reveal its meaning to our groping intelligence. The human intellect cuts
out the error and the truth with it and replaces it by another half-truth half-error; but the Divine Wisdom suffers
our mistakes to continue until we are able to arrive at the truth hidden and protected under every false cover.
Our sins are the misdirected steps of a seeking Power that aims, not at sin, but at perfection, at something that
we might call a divine virtue. Often they are the veils of a quality that has to be transformed and delivered out of
this ugly disguise: otherwise, in the perfect providence of things, they would not have been suffered to exist or to
continue. The Master of our works is neither a blunderer nor an indifferent witness nor a dallier with the luxury
of unneeded evils. He is wiser than our reason and wiser than our virtue.
\par Our nature is not only mistaken in will and ignorant in knowledge but weak in power; but the Divine Force is
there and will lead us if we trust in it and it will use our deficiencies and our powers for the divine purpose. If we
fail in our immediate aim, it is because he has intended the failure; often our failure or ill-result is the right road to
a truer issue than an immediate and complete success would have put in our reach. If we suffer, it is because
something in us has to be prepared for a rarer possibility of delight. If we stumble, it is to learn in the end the
secret of a more perfect walking. Let us not be in too furious a haste to acquire even peace, purity and
perfection. Peace must be ours, but not the peace of an empty or devastated nature or of slain or mutilated
capacities incapable of unrest because we have made them incapable of intensity and fire and force. Purity must
be our aim, but not the purity of a void or of a bleak and rigid coldness. Perfection is demanded of us, but not the
perfection that can exist only by confining its scope within narrow limits or putting an arbitrary full stop to the
ever self-extending scroll of the Infinite. Our object is to change into the divine nature, but the divine nature is not
a mental or moral but a spiritual condition, difficult to achieve, difficult even to conceive by our
Page 246

intelligence. The Master of our work and our Yoga knows the thing to be done, and we must allow him to do it in
us by his own means and in his own manner.
\par The movement of the Ignorance is egoistic at its core and nothing is more difficult for us than to get rid of
egoism while yet we admit personality and adhere to action in the half-light and half-force of our unfinished
nature. It is easier to starve the ego by renouncing the impulse to act or to kill it by cutting away from us all
movement of personality. It is easier to exalt it into self-forgetfulness immersed in a trance of peace or an
ecstasy of divine Love. But our more difficult problem is to liberate the true Person and attain to a divine
manhood which shall be the pure vessel of a divine force and the perfect instrument of a divine action. Step after
step has to be firmly taken; difficulty after difficulty has to be entirely experienced and entirely mastered. Only
the Divine Wisdom and Power can do this for us and it will do all if we yield to it in an entire faith and follow and
assent to its workings with a constant courage and patience.
\par The first step on this long path is to consecrate all our works as a sacrifice to the Divine in us and in the
world; this is an attitude of the mind and heart, not too difficult to initiate, but very difficult to make absolutely
sincere and all-pervasive. The second step is to renounce attachment to the fruit of our works; for the only true,
inevitable and utterly desirable fruit of sacrifice—the one thing needful—is the Divine Presence and the Divine
Consciousness and Power in us, and if that is gained, all else will be added. This is a transformation of the
egoistic will in our vital being, our desire-soul and desire-nature, and it is far more difficult than the other. The
third step is to get rid of the central egoism and even the ego-sense of the worker. That is the most difficult
transformation of all and it cannot be perfectly done if the first two steps have not been taken; but these first
steps too cannot be completed unless the third comes in to crown the movement and, by the extinction of egoism,
eradicates the very origin of desire. Only when the small ego-sense is rooted out from the nature can the seeker
know his true person that stands above as a portion and power of the Divine
Page 247

and renounce all motive-force other than the will of the Divine Shakti.
\par
\tstar
\par There are gradations in this last integralising movement; for it cannot be done at once or without long
approaches that bring it progressively nearer and make it at last possible. The first attitude to be taken is to cease
to regard ourselves as the worker and firmly to realise that we are only one instrument of the cosmic Force. At
first it is not the one Force but many cosmic forces that seem to move us; but these may be turned into feeders
of the ego and this vision liberates the mind but not the rest of the nature. Even when we become aware of all as
the working of one cosmic Force and of the Divine behind it, that too need not liberate. If the egoism of the
worker disappears, the egoism of the instrument may replace it or else prolong it in a disguise. The life of the
world has been full of instances of egoism of this kind and it can be more engrossing and enormous than any
other; there is the same danger in Yoga. A man becomes a leader of men or eminent in a large or lesser circle
and feels himself full of a power that he knows to be beyond his own ego-force; he may be aware of a Fate
acting through him or a Will mysterious and unfathomable or a Light within of great brilliance. There are
extraordinary results of his thoughts, his actions or his creative genius. He effects some tremendous destruction
that clears the path for humanity or some great construction that becomes its momentary resting-place. He is a
scourge or he is a bringer of light and healing, a creator of beauty or a messenger of knowledge. Or, if his work
and its effects are on a lesser scale and have a limited field, still they are attended by the strong sense that he is
an instrument and chosen for his mission or his labour. Men who have this destiny and these powers come easily
to believe and declare themselves to be mere instruments in the hand of God or of Fate: but even in the
declaration we can see that there can intrude or take refuge an intenser and more exaggerated egoism than
ordinary men have the courage to assert or the strength to
Page 248

house within them. And often if men of this kind speak of God, it is to erect an image of him which is really
nothing but a huge shadow of themselves or their own nature, a sustaining Deific Essence of their own type of
will and thought and quality and force. This magnified image of their ego is the Master whom they serve. This
happens only too often in Yoga to strong but crude vital natures or minds too easily exalted when they allow
ambition, pride or the desire of greatness to enter into their spiritual seeking and vitiate its purity of motive; a
magnified ego stands between them and their true being and grasps for its own personal purpose the strength
from a greater unseen Power, divine or undivine, acting through them of which they become vaguely or intensely
aware. An intellectual perception or vital sense of a Force greater than ours and of ourselves as moved by it is
not sufficient to liberate from the ego.
\par This perception, this sense of a greater Power in us or above and moving us, is not a hallucination or a
megalomania. Those who thus feel and see have a larger sight than ordinary men and have advanced a step
beyond the limited physical intelligence, but theirs is not the plenary vision or the direct experience. For, because
they are not clear in mind and aware in the soul, because their awakening is more in the vital parts than into the
spiritual substance of Self, they cannot be the conscious instruments of the Divine or come face to face with the
Master, but are used through their fallible and imperfect nature. The most they see of the Divinity is a Fate or a
cosmic Force or else they give his name to a limited Godhead or, worse, to a Titanic or demoniac Power that
veils him. Even certain religious founders have erected the image of the God of a sect or a national God or a
Power of terror and punishment or a Numen of sattwic love and mercy and virtue and seem not to have seen the
One and Eternal. The Divine accepts the image they make of him and does his work in them through that
medium, but, since the one Force is felt and acts in their imperfect nature but more intensely than in others, the
motive principle of egoism too can be more intense in them than in others. An exalted rajasic or sattwic ego still
holds them and stands between them and the integral Truth. Even this is
Page 249

something, a beginning, although far from the true and perfect experience. A much worse thing may befall those
who break something of the human bonds but have not purity and have not the knowledge, for they may become
instruments, but not of the Divine; too often, using his name, they serve unconsciously his Masks and black
Contraries, the Powers of Darkness.
\par Our nature must house the cosmic Force but not in its lower aspect or in its rajasic or sattwic movement; it
must serve the universal Will, but in the light of a greater liberating knowledge. There must be no egoism of any
kind in the attitude of the instrument, even when we are fully conscious of the greatness of the Force within us.
Every man is knowingly or unknowingly the instrument of a universal Power and, apart from the inner Presence,
there is no such essential difference between one action and another, one kind of instrumentation and another as
would warrant the folly of an egoistic pride. The difference between knowledge and ignorance is a grace of the
Spirit; the breath of divine Power blows where it lists and fills today one and tomorrow another with the word or
the puissance. If the potter shapes one pot more perfectly than another, the merit lies not in the vessel but the
maker. The attitude of our mind must not be “This is my strength” or “Behold God's power in me”, but rather “A
Divine Power works in this mind and body and it is the same that works in all men and in the animal, in the plant
and in the metal, in conscious and living things and in things apparently inconscient and inanimate.” This large
view of the One working in all and of the whole world as the equal instrument of a divine action and gradual
self-expression, if it becomes our entire experience, will help to eliminate all rajasic egoism out of us and even the
sattwic ego-sense will begin to pass away from our nature.
\par The elimination of this form of ego leads straight towards the true instrumental action which is the essence
of a perfect Karmayoga. For while we cherish the instrumental ego, we may pretend to ourselves that we are
conscious instruments of the Divine, but in reality we are trying to make of the Divine Shakti an instrument of our
own desires or our egoistic purpose. And
Page 250

even if the ego is subjected but not eliminated, we may indeed be engines of the Divine Work, but we shall be
imperfect tools and deflect or impair the working by our mental errors, our vital distortions or the obstinate
incapacities of our physical nature. If this ego disappears, then we can truly become, not only pure instruments
consciously consenting to every turn of the divine Hand that moves us, but aware of our true nature, conscious
portions of the one Eternal and Infinite put out in herself for her works by the supreme Shakti.
\par
\tstar
\par There is another greater step to be taken after the surrender of our instrumental ego to the Divine Shakti. It
is not enough to know her as the one Cosmic Force that moves us and all creatures on the planes of mind, life
and matter; for this is the lower Nature and, although the Divine Knowledge, Light, Power are there concealed
and at work in this Ignorance and can break partly its veil and manifest something of their true character or
descend from above and uplift these inferior workings, yet, even if we realise the One in a spiritualised mind, a
spiritualised life-movement, a spiritualised body-consciousness, an imperfection remains in the dynamic parts.
There is a stumbling response to the Supreme Power, a veil over the face of the Divine, a constant mixture of
the Ignorance. It is only when we open to the Divine Shakti in the truth of her Force which transcends this lower
Prakriti that we can be perfect instruments of her power and knowledge.
\par Not only liberation but perfection must be the aim of the Karmayoga. The Divine works through our nature
and according to our nature; if our nature is imperfect, the work also will be imperfect, mixed, inadequate. Even
it may be marred by gross errors, falsehoods, moral weaknesses, diverting influences. The work of the Divine
will be done in us even then, but according to our weakness, not according to the strength and purity of its
source. If ours were not an integral Yoga, if we sought only the liberation of the self within us or the motionless
existence
Page 251

of \NH Purusha separated from Prakriti, this dynamic imperfection might not matter. Calm, untroubled, not
depressed, not elated, refusing to accept the perfection or imperfection, fault or merit, sin or virtue as ours,
perceiving that it is the modes of Nature working in the field of her modes that make this mixture, we could
withdraw into the silence of the spirit and, pure, untouched, witness only the workings of Prakriti. But in an
integral realisation this can only be a step on the way, not our last resting-place. For we aim at the divine
realisation not only in the immobility of the Spirit, but also in the movement of Nature. And this cannot be
altogether until we can feel the presence and power of the Divine in every step, motion, figure of our activities, in
every turn of our will, in every thought, feeling and impulse. No doubt, we can feel that in essence even in the
nature of the Ignorance, but it is the divine Power and Presence in a disguise, a diminution, an inferior figure.
Ours is a greater demand, that our nature shall be a power of the Divine in the Truth of the Divine, in the Light,
in the force of the eternal self-conscient Will, in the wideness of the sempiternal Knowledge.
\par After the removal of the veil of ego, the removal of the veil of Nature and her inferior modes that govern
our mind, life and body. As soon as the limits of the ego begin to fade, we see how that veil is constituted and
detect the action of cosmic Nature in us, and in or behind cosmic Nature we sense the presence of the cosmic
Self and the dynamis of the world-pervading Ishwara. The Master of the instrument stands behind all this
working, and even within the working there is his touch and the drive of a great guiding or disposing Influence. It
is no longer ego or ego-force that we serve; we obey the World-Master and his evolutionary impulse. At each
step we can say in the language of the Sanskrit verse, “Even as I am appointed by Thee seated in my heart, so,
O Lord, I act.” But still this action may be of two very different kinds, one only illumined, the other transformed
and uplifted into a greater supernature. For we may keep on in the way of action upheld and followed by our
nature when by her and her illusion of egoism we were “turned as if mounted on a machine,” but now with a
perfect
Page 252

understanding of the mechanism and its utilisation for his world purposes by the Master of works whom we feel
behind it. This is indeed as far as even many great Yogis have reached on the levels of spiritualised mind; but it
need not be so always, for there is a greater supramental possibility. It is possible to rise beyond spiritualised
mind and to act spontaneously in the living presence of the original divine Truth-Force of the Supreme Mother.
Our motion one with her motion and merged in it, our will one with her will, our energy absolved in her energy,
we shall feel her working through us as the Divine manifest in a supreme Wisdom-Power, and we shall be aware
of the transformed mind, life and body only as the channels of a supreme Light and Force beyond them, infallible
in its steps because transcendent and total in its knowledge. Of this Light and Force we shall not only be the
recipients, channels, instruments, but become a part of it in a supreme uplifted abiding experience.
\par Already, before we reach this last perfection, we can have the union with the Divine in works in its extreme
wideness, if not yet on its most luminous heights; for we perceive no longer merely Nature or the modes of
Nature, but become conscious, in our physical movements, in our nervous and vital reactions, in our mental
workings, of a Force greater than body, mind and life which takes hold of our limited instruments and drives all
their motion. There is no longer the sense of ourselves moving, thinking or feeling but of that moving, feeling and
thinking in us. This force that we feel is the universal Force of the Divine, which, veiled or unveiled, acting
directly or permitting the use of its powers by beings in the cosmos, is the one Energy that alone exists and alone
makes universal or individual action possible. For this force is the Divine itself in the body of its power; all is that,
power of act, power of thought and knowledge, power of mastery and enjoyment, power of love. Conscious
always and in everything, in ourselves and in others, of the Master of Works possessing, inhabiting, enjoying
through this Force that is himself, becoming through it all existences and all happenings, we shall have arrived at
the divine union through works and achieved by that fulfilment in works all that others have gained
Page 253

through absolute devotion or through pure knowledge. But there is still another step that calls us, an ascent out of
this cosmic identity into the identity of the Divine Transcendence.
\par The Master of our works and our being is not merely a Godhead here within us, nor is he merely a cosmic
Spirit or some kind of universal Power. The world and the Divine are not one and the same thing, as a certain
kind of pantheistic thinking would like to believe. The world is an emanation; it depends upon something that
manifests in it but is not limited by it: the Divine is not here alone; there is a Beyond, an eternal Transcendence.
The individual being also in its spiritual part is not a formation in the cosmic existence—our ego, our mind, our
life, our body are that; but the immutable spirit, the imperishable soul in us has come out of the Transcendence.
\par
\tstar
\par A Transcendent who is beyond all world and all Nature and yet possesses the world and its nature, who has
descended with something of himself into it and is shaping it into that which as yet it is not, is the Source of our
being, the Source of our works and their Master. But the seat of the Transcendent Consciousness is above in an
absoluteness of divine Existence—and there too is the absolute Power, Truth, Bliss of the Eternal—of which our
mentality can form no conception and of which even our greatest spiritual experience is only a diminished
reflection in the spiritualised mind and heart, a faint shadow, a thin derivate. Yet proceeding from it there is a sort
of golden corona of Light, Power, Bliss and Truth—a divine Truth-Consciousness as the ancient mystics called it,
a Supermind, a Gnosis, with which this world of a lesser consciousness proceeding by Ignorance is in secret
relation and which alone maintains it and prevents it from falling into a disintegrated chaos. The powers we are
now satisfied to call gnosis, intuition or illumination are only fainter lights of which that is the full and flaming
source, and between the highest human intelligence and it there lie many levels of ascending consciousness,
highest mental or overmental, which
Page 254

we would have to conquer before we arrived there or could bring down its greatness and glory here. Yet,
however difficult, that ascent, that victory is the destiny of the human spirit and that luminous descent or bringing
down of the divine Truth is the inevitable term of the troubled evolution of the earth-nature; that intended
consummation is its \sforced{raison d'\^etre}, our culminating state and the explanation of our terrestrial existence.
For though the transcendental Divine is already here as the Purushottama in the secret heart of our mystery, he
is veiled by many coats and disguises of his magic world-wide Yoga-Maya; it is only by the ascent and victory of
the Soul here in the body that the disguises can fall away and the dynamis of the supreme Truth replace this
tangled weft of half-truth that becomes creative error, this emergent Knowledge that is converted by its plunge
into the inconscience of Matter and its slow partial return towards itself into an effective Ignorance.
\par For here in the world, though the Gnosis is there secretly behind existence, what acts is not the Gnosis but a
magic of Knowledge-Ignorance, an incalculable yet apparently mechanical Overmind Maya. The Divine appears
to us here in one view as an equal, inactive and impersonal Witness Spirit, an immobile consenting Purusha not
bound by quality or Space or Time, whose support or sanction is given impartially to the play of all action and
energies which the transcendent Will has once permitted and authorised to fulfil themselves in the cosmos. This
Witness Spirit, this immobile Self in things, seems to will nothing and determine nothing; yet we become aware
that his very passivity, his silent presence compels all things to travel even in their ignorance towards a divine
goal and attracts through division towards a yet unrealised oneness. Yet no supreme infallible Divine Will seems
to be there, only a widely deployed Cosmic Energy or a mechanical executive Process, Prakriti. This is one side
of the cosmic Self; the other presents itself as a universal Divine, one in being, multiple in personality and power,
who conveys to us, when we enter into the consciousness of his universal forces, a sense of infinite quality and
will and act and world-wide knowledge and a one yet innumerable delight; for through
Page 255

him we become one with all existences not only in their essence but in their play of action, see ourself in all and
all in ourself, perceive all knowledge and thought and feeling as motions of the one Mind and Heart, all energy
and action as kinetics of the one Will in power, all Matter and form as particles of the one Body, all personalities
as projections of the one Person, all egos as deformations of the one and sole real “I” in existence. In him we no
longer stand separate, but lose our active ego in the universal movement, even as by the Witness who is without
qualities and for ever unattached and unentangled, we lose our static ego in the universal peace.
\par And yet there remains a contradiction between these two terms, the aloof divine Silence and the
all-embracing divine \NH Action, which we may heal in ourselves in a certain manner, in a certain high degree
which seems to us complete, yet is not complete because it cannot altogether transform and conquer. A universal
Peace, Light, Power, Bliss is ours, but its effective expression is not that of the Truth-Consciousness, the divine
Gnosis, but still, though wonderfully freed, uplifted and illumined, supports only the present self-expression of the
Cosmic Spirit and does not transform, as would a transcendental Descent, the ambiguous symbols and veiled
mysteries of a world of Ignorance. Ourselves are free, but the earth-consciousness remains in bondage; only a
further transcendental ascent and descent can entirely heal the contradiction and transform and deliver.
\par For there is yet a third intensely close and personal aspect of the Master of Works which is a key to his
sublimest hidden mystery and ecstasy; for he detaches from the secret of the hidden Transcendence and the
ambiguous display of the cosmic Movement an individual Power of the Divine that can mediate between the two
and bridge our passage from the one to the other. In this aspect the transcendent and universal person of the
Divine conforms itself to our individualised personality and accepts a personal relation with us, at once identified
with us as our supreme Self and yet close and different as our Master, Friend, Lover, Teacher, our Father and
our Mother, our Playmate
Page 256

in the great world-game who has disguised himself throughout as friend and enemy, helper and opponent and, in
all relations and in all workings that affect us, has led our steps towards our perfection and our release. It is
through this more personal manifestation that we are admitted to some possibility of the complete transcendental
experience; for in him we meet the One not merely in a liberated calm and peace, not merely with a passive or
active submission in our works or through the mystery of union with a universal Knowledge and Power filling and
guiding us, but with an ecstasy of divine Love and divine Delight that shoots up beyond silent Witness and active
World-Power to some positive divination of a greater beatific secret. For it is not so much knowledge leading to
some ineffable Absolute, not so much works lifting us beyond world-process to the originating supreme Knower
and Master, but rather this thing most intimate to us, yet at present most obscure, which keeps for us wrapped in
its passionate veil the deep and rapturous secret of the transcendent Godhead and some absolute positiveness of
its perfect Being, its all-concentrating Bliss, its mystic Ananda.
\par But the individual relation with the Divine does not always or from the beginning bring into force a widest
enlargement or a highest self-exceeding. At first this Godhead close to our being or immanent within us can be
felt fully only in the scope of our personal nature and experience, a Leader and Master, a Guide and Teacher, a
Friend and Lover, or else a spirit, power or presence, constituting and uplifting our upward and enlarging
movement by the force of his intimate reality inhabiting the heart or presiding over our nature from above even
our highest intelligence. It is our personal evolution that is his preoccupation, a personal relation with him that is
our joy and fulfilment, the building of our nature into his divine image that is our self-finding and perfection. The
outside world seems to exist only as a field for this growth and a provider of materials or of helping and opposing
forces for its successive stages. Our works done in that world are his works, but even when they serve some
temporary universal end, their main purpose for us is to make outwardly dynamic or give inward power to our
relations with
Page 257

this immanent Divine. Many seekers ask for no more or see the continuation and fulfilment of this spiritual
flowering only in heavens beyond; the union is consummated and made perpetual in an eternal dwelling-place of
his perfection, joy and beauty. But this is not enough for the integral seeker; however intense and beautiful, a
personal isolated achievement cannot be his sole aim or his entire experience. A time must come when the
personal opens out into the universal; our very individuality, spiritual, mental, vital, physical even, becomes
universalised: it is seen as a power of his universal force and cosmic spirit, or else it contains the universe in that
ineffable wideness which comes to the individual consciousness when it breaks its bonds and flows upward
towards the Transcendent and on every side into the Infinite.
\par
\tstar
\par In a Yoga lived entirely on the spiritualised mental plane it is possible and even usual for these three
fundamental aspects of the Divine—the Individual or Immanent, the Cosmic and the Transcendent—to stand out
as separate realisations. Each by itself then appears sufficient to satisfy the yearning of the seeker. Alone with
the personal Divine in the inner heart's illumined secret chamber, he can build his being into the Beloved's image
and ascend out of fallen Nature to dwell with him in some heaven of the Spirit. Absolved in the cosmic wideness,
released from ego, his personality reduced to a point of working of the universal Force, himself calm, liberated,
deathless in universality, motionless in the Witness Self even while outspread without limit in unending Space and
Time, he can enjoy in the world the freedom of the Timeless. One-pointed towards some ineffable
Transcendence, casting away his personality, shedding from him the labour and trouble of the universal Dynamis,
he can escape into an inexpressible Nirvana, annul all things in an intolerant exaltation of flight into the
Incommunicable.
\par But none of these achievements is enough for one who seeks the wide completeness of an integral Yoga.
An individual salvation is not enough for him; for he finds himself opening to
Page 258

a cosmic consciousness which far exceeds by its breadth and vastness the narrower intensity of a limited
individual fulfilment, and its call is imperative; driven by that immense compulsion, he must break through all
separative boundaries, spread himself in world-Nature, contain the universe. Above too, there is urgent upon him
a dynamic realisation pressing from the Supreme upon this world of beings, and only some encompassing and
exceeding of the cosmic consciousness can release into manifestation here that yet unlavished splendour. But the
cosmic consciousness too is not sufficient; for it is not all the Divine Reality, not integral. There is a divine secret
behind personality that he must discover; there, waiting in it to be delivered here into Time, stands the mystery of
the embodiment of the Transcendence. In the cosmic consciousness there remains at the end a hiatus, an
unequal equation of a highest Knowledge that can liberate but not effectuate with a Power seeming to use a
limited Knowledge or masking itself with a surface Ignorance that can create but creates imperfection or a
perfection transient, limited and in fetters. On one side there is a free undynamic Witness and on the other side a
bound Executrix of action who has not been given all the means of action. The reconciliation of these
companions and opposites seems to be reserved, postponed, held back in an Unmanifest still beyond us. But,
again, a mere escape into some absolute Transcendence leaves personality unfulfilled and the universal action
inconclusive and cannot satisfy the integral seeker. He feels that the Truth that is for ever is a Power that
creates as well as a stable Existence; it is not a Power solely of illusory or ignorant manifestation. The eternal
Truth can manifest its truths in Time; it can create in Knowledge and not only in Inconscience and Ignorance. A
divine Descent no less than an ascent to the Divine is possible; there is a prospect of the bringing down of a
future perfection and a present deliverance. As his knowledge widens, it becomes for him more and more
evident that it was this for which the Master of Works cast down the soul within him here as a spark of his fire
into the darkness, that it might grow there into a centre of the Light that is for ever.
\par The Transcendent, the Universal, the Individual are three
Page 259

powers overarching, underlying and penetrating the whole manifestation; this is the first of the Trinities. In the
unfolding of consciousness also, these are the three fundamental terms and none of them can be neglected if we
would have the experience of the whole Truth of existence. Out of the individual we wake into a vaster freer
cosmic consciousness; but out of the universal too with its complex of forms and powers we must emerge by a
still greater self-exceeding into a consciousness without limits that is founded on the Absolute. And yet in this
ascension we do not really abolish but take up and transfigure what we seem to leave; for there is a height
where the three live eternally in each other, on that height they are blissfully joined in a nodus of their harmonised
oneness. But that summit is above the highest and largest spiritualised mentality, even if some reflection of it can
be experienced there; mind, to attain to it, to live there, must exceed itself and be transformed into a supramental
gnostic light, power and substance. In this lower diminished consciousness a harmony can indeed be attempted,
but it must always remain imperfect; a coordination is possible, not a simultaneous fused fulfilment. An ascent
out of the mind is, for any greater realisation, imperative. Or else, there must be, with the ascent or consequent to
it, a dynamic descent of the self-existent Truth that exists always uplifted in its own light above Mind, eternal,
prior to the manifestation of Life and Matter.
\par For Mind is Maya, \s{sat-asat}: there is a field of embrace of the true and the false, the existent and the
non-existent, and it is in that ambiguous field that Mind seems to reign; but even in its own reign it is in truth a
diminished consciousness, it is not part of the original and supremely originating power of the Eternal. Even if
Mind is able to reflect some image of essential Truth in its substance, yet the dynamic force and action of Truth
appears in it always broken and divided. All Mind can do is to piece together the fragments or deduce a unity;
truth of Mind is only a half-truth or a portion of a puzzle. Mental knowledge is always relative, partial and
inconclusive, and its outgoing action and creation come out still more confused in its steps or precise only in
narrow limits and by imperfect piecings together. Even
Page 260

in this diminished consciousness the Divine manifests as a Spirit in Mind, just as he moves as a Spirit in Life or
dwells still more obscurely as a Spirit in Matter; but not here is his full dynamic revelation, not here the perfect
identities of the Eternal. Only when we cross the border into a larger luminous consciousness and self-aware
substance where divine Truth is a native and not a stranger, will there be revealed to us the Master of our
existence in the imperishable integral truth of his being and his powers and his workings. Only there, too, will his
works in us assume the flawless movement of his unfailing supramental purpose.
\par
\tstar
\par But that is the end of a long and difficult journey, and the Master of works does not wait till then to meet the
seeker on the path of Yoga and put his secret or half-shown Hand upon him and upon his life and actions.
Already he was there in the world as the Originator and Receiver of works behind the dense veils of the
Inconscient, disguised in force of Life, visible to the Mind through symbol godheads and figures. It may well be in
these disguises that he first meets the soul destined to the way of the integral Yoga. Or even, wearing still vaguer
masks, he may be conceived by us as an Ideal or mentalised as an abstract Power of Love, Good, Beauty or
Knowledge; or, as we turn our feet towards the Way, he may come to us veiled as the call of \NH Humanity or
a Will in things that drives towards the deliverance of the world from the grasp of Darkness and Falsehood and
Death and Suffering—the great quaternary of the Ignorance. Then, after we have entered the path, he envelops
us with his wide and mighty liberating Impersonality or moves near to us with the face and form of a personal
Godhead. In and around us we feel a Power that upholds and protects and cherishes; we hear a Voice that
guides; a conscious Will greater than ourselves rules us; an imperative Force moves our thought and actions and
our very body; an ever-widening Consciousness assimilates ours, a living Light of Knowledge lights all within, or
a Beatitude invades us; a Mightiness presses from above, concrete, massive
Page 261

and overpowering, and penetrates and pours itself into the very stuff of our nature; a Peace sits there, a Light, a
Bliss, a Strength, a Greatness. Or there are relations, personal, intimate as life itself, sweet as love, encompassing
like the sky, deep like deep waters. A Friend walks at our side; a Lover is with us in our heart's secrecy; a
Master of the Work and the Ordeal points our way; a Creator of things uses us as his instrument; we are in the
arms of the eternal Mother. All these more seizable aspects in which the Ineffable meets us are truths and not
mere helpful symbols or useful imaginations; but as we progress, their first imperfect formulations in our
experience yield to a larger vision of the one Truth that is behind them. At each step their mere mental masks
are shed and they acquire a larger, a profounder, a more intimate significance. At last on the supramental
borders all these Godheads combine their forces and, without at all ceasing to be, coalesce together. On this path
the Divine Aspects are not revealed in order to be cast away; they are not temporary spiritual conveniences or
compromises with an illusory Consciousness or dream-figures mysteriously cast upon us by the incommunicable
superconscience of the Absolute; on the contrary, their power increases and their absoluteness reveals itself as
they draw near to the Truth from which they issue.
\par For that now superconscient Transcendence is a Power as well as an Existence. The supramental
Transcendence is not a vacant Wonder, but an Inexpressible which contains for ever all essential things that
have issued from it; it holds them there in their supreme everlasting reality and their own characteristic absolutes.
The diminution, division, degradation that create here the sense of an unsatisfactory puzzle, a mystery of Maya,
themselves diminish and fall from us in our ascension, and the Divine Powers assume their real forms and appear
more and more as the terms of a Truth in process of realisation here. A soul of the Divine is here slowly
awaking out of its involution and concealment in the material Inconscience. The Master of our works is not a
Master of illusions, but a supreme Reality who is working out his self-expressive realities delivered slowly from
the cocoons of the Ignorance in which for the purposes
Page 262

of an evolutionary manifestation they were allowed for a while to slumber. For the supramental Transcendence
is not a thing absolutely apart and unconnected with our present existence. It is a greater Light out of which all
this has come for the adventure of the Soul lapsing into the Inconscience and emerging out of it, and, while that
adventure proceeds, it waits superconscient above our minds till it can become conscious in us. Hereafter it will
unveil itself and by the unveiling reveal to us all the significance of our own being and our works; for it will
disclose the Divine whose fuller manifestation in the world will release and accomplish that covert significance.
\par In that disclosure the Transcendent Divine will be more and more made known to us as the Supreme
Existence and the Perfect Source of all that we are; but equally we shall see him as a Master of works and
creation prepared to pour out more and more of himself into the field of his manifestation. The cosmic
consciousness and its action will appear no longer as a huge regulated Chance, but as a field of the
manifestation; there the Divine is seen as a presiding and pervading Cosmic Spirit who receives all out of the
Transcendence and develops what descends into forms that are now an opaque disguise or a baffling
half-disguise, but destined to be a transparent revelation. The individual consciousness will recover its true sense
and action; for it is the form of a Soul sent out from the Supreme and, in spite of all appearances, a nucleus or
nebula in which the Divine Mother-Force is at work for the victorious embodiment of the timeless and formless
Divine in Time and Matter. This will reveal itself slowly to our vision and experience as the will of the Master of
works and as their own ultimate significance, which alone gives to world-creation and to our own action in the
world a light and a meaning. To recognise that and to strive towards its effectuation is the whole burden of the
Way of Divine Works in the integral Yoga.
Page 263

\par
\hn Chapter XII
\par
\ht The Divine Work
\par\drop One question remains for the seeker upon the way of works, when his quest is or seems to have come
to its natural end,—whether any work or what work is left for the soul after liberation and to what purpose?
Equality has been seated in the nature or governs the whole nature; there has been achieved a radical
deliverance from the ego-idea, from the pervading ego-sense, from all feelings and impulsions of the ego and its
self-will and desires. The entire self-consecration has been made not only in thought and heart but in all the
complexities of the being. A complete purity or transcendence of the three gunas has been harmoniously
established. The soul has seen the Master of its works and lives in his presence or is consciously contained in his
being or is unified with him or feels him in the heart or above and obeys his dictates. It has known its true being
and cast away the veil of the Ignorance. What work then remains for the worker in man and with what motive,
to what end, in what spirit will it be done?
\par
\tstar
\par There is one answer with which we are very familiar in India; no work at all remains, for the rest is
quiescence. When the soul can live in the eternal presence of the Supreme or when it is unified with the
Absolute, the object of our existence in the world, if it can be said to have an object, at once ceases. Man,
released from the curse of self-division and the curse of Ignorance, is released too from that other affliction, the
curse of works. All action would then be a derogation from the supreme state and a return into the Ignorance.
This attitude towards life is supported by an idea founded on the error of the vital nature to which action is
dictated only by one or all of three inferior
Page 264

motives, necessity, restless instinct and impulse or desire. The instinct or impulse quiescent, desire extinguished,
what place is there for works? Some mechanical necessity might remain but no other, and even that would cease
for ever with the fall of the body. But after all, even so, while life remains, action is unavoidable. Mere thinking
or, in the absence of thought, mere living is itself an act and a cause of many effects. All existence in the world
is work, force, potency, and has a dynamic effect in the whole by its mere presence, even the inertia of the clod,
even the silence of the immobile Buddha on the verge of Nirvana. There is the question only of the manner of
the action, the instruments that are used or that act of themselves, and the spirit and knowledge of the worker.
For in reality, no man works, but Nature works through him for the self-expression of a Power within that
proceeds from the Infinite. To know that and live in the presence and in the being of the Master of Nature, free
from desire and the illusion of personal impulsion, is the one thing needful. That and not the bodily cessation of
action is the true release; for the bondage of works at once ceases. A man might sit still and motionless for ever
and yet be as much bound to the Ignorance as the animal or the insect. But if he can make this greater
consciousness dynamic within him, then all the work of all the worlds could pass through him and yet he would
remain at rest, absolute in calm and peace, free from all bondage. Action in the world is given us first as a means
for our self-development and self-fulfilment; but even if we reached a last possible divine self-completeness, it
would still remain as a means for the fulfilment of the divine intention in the world and of the larger universal self
of which each being is a portion—a portion that has come down with it from the Transcendence.
\par In a certain sense, when his Yoga has reached a certain culmination, works cease for a man; for he has no
further personal necessity of works, no sense of works being done by him; but there is no need to flee from
action or to take refuge in a blissful inertia. For now he acts as the Divine Existence acts without any binding
necessity and without any compelling ignorance. Even in doing works \sforced{he} does not work at all; he
undertakes
Page 265

no personal initiative. It is the Divine Shakti that works in him through his nature; his action develops through the
spontaneity of a supreme Force by which his instruments are possessed, of which he is a part, with whose will
his will is identical and his power is her power. The spirit within him contains, supports and watches this action; it
presides over it in knowledge but is not glued or clamped to the work by attachment or need, is not bound by
desire of its fruit, is not enslaved to any movement or impulse.
\par It is a common error to suppose that action is impossible or at least meaningless without desire. If desire
ceases, we are told, action also must cease. But this, like other too simply comprehensive generalisations, is more
attractive to the cutting and defining mind than true. The major part of the work done in the universe is
accomplished without any interference of desire; it proceeds by the calm necessity and spontaneous law of
Nature. Even man constantly does work of various kinds by a spontaneous impulse, intuition, instinct or acts in
obedience to a natural necessity and law of forces without either mental planning or the urge of a conscious vital
volition or emotional desire. Often enough his act is contrary to his intention or his desire; it proceeds out of him
in subjection to a need or compulsion, in submission to an impulse, in obedience to a force in him that pushes for
self-expression or in conscious pursuance of a higher principle. Desire is an additional lure to which Nature has
given a great part in the life of animated beings in order to produce a certain kind of rajasic action necessary for
her intermediate ends; but it is not her sole or even her chief engine. It has its great use while it endures: it helps
us to rise out of inertia, it contradicts many tamasic forces which would otherwise inhibit action. But the seeker
who has advanced far on the way of works has passed beyond this intermediate stage in which desire is a
helpful engine. Its push is no longer indispensable for his action, but is rather a terrible hindrance and source of
stumbling, inefficiency and failure. Others are obliged to obey a personal choice or motive, but he has to learn to
act with an impersonal or a universal mind or as a part or an instrument of an infinite Person. A
Page 266

calm indifference, a joyful impartiality or a blissful response to a divine Force, whatever its dictate, is the
condition of his doing any effective work or undertaking any worth-while action. Not desire, not attachment must
drive him, but a Will that stirs in a divine peace, a Knowledge that moves from the transcendent Light, a glad
Impulse that is a force from the supreme Ananda.
\par
\tstar
\par In an advanced stage of the Yoga it is indifferent to the seeker, in the sense of any personal preference,
what action he shall do or not do; even whether he shall act or not, is not decided by his personal choice or
pleasure. Always he is moved to do whatever is in consonance with the Truth or whatever the Divine demands
through his nature. A false conclusion is sometimes drawn from this that the spiritual man, accepting the position
in which Fate or God or his past Karma has placed him, content to work in the field and cadre of the family, clan,
caste, nation, occupation which are his by birth and circumstance, will not and even perhaps ought not to make
any movement to exceed them or to pursue any great mundane end. Since he has really no work to do, since he
has only to use works, no matter what works, as long as he is in the body in order to arrive at liberation or, having
arrived, only to obey the supreme Will and do whatever it dictates, the actual field given him is sufficient for the
purpose. Once free, he has only to continue working in the sphere assigned to him by Fate and circumstances till
the great hour arrives when he can at last disappear into the Infinite. To insist on any particular end or to work
for some great mundane object is to fall into the illusion of works; it is to entertain the error that terrestrial life
has an intelligible intention and contains objects worthy of pursuit. The great theory of Illusion, which is a
practical denial of the Divine in the world, even when in idea it acknowledges the Presence, is once more before
us. But the Divine is here in the world,—not only in status but in dynamis, not only as a spiritual self and
presence but as power, force, energy,—and therefore a divine work in the world is possible.
Page 267

\par There is no narrow principle, no field of cabined action that can be imposed on the Karmayogin as his rule or
his province. This much is true that every kind of works, whether small to man's imagination or great, petty in
scope or wide, can be equally used in the progress towards liberation or for self-discipline. This much is also true
that after liberation a man may dwell in any sphere of life and in any kind of action and fulfil there his existence
in the Divine. According as he is moved by the Spirit, he may remain in the sphere assigned to him by birth and
circumstances or break that framework and go forth to an untrammelled action which shall be the fitting body of
his greatened consciousness and higher knowledge. To the outward eyes of men the inner liberation may make
no apparent difference in his outward acts; or, on the contrary, the freedom and infinity within may translate
itself into an outward dynamic working so large and new that all regards are drawn by this novel force. If such
be the intention of the Supreme within him, the liberated soul may be content with a subtle and limited action
within the old human surroundings which will in no way seek to change their outward appearance. But it may too
be called to a work which will not only alter the forms and sphere of its own external life but, leaving nothing
around it unchanged or unaffected, create a new world or a new order.
\par
\tstar
\par A prevalent idea would persuade us that the sole aim of liberation is to secure for the individual soul freedom
from physical rebirth in the unstable life of the universe. If this freedom is once assured, there is no further work
for it in life here or elsewhere or only that which the continued existence of the body demands or the unfulfilled
effects of past lives necessitate. This little, rapidly exhausted or consumed by the fire of Yoga, will cease with
the departure of the released soul from the body. The aim of escape from rebirth, now long fixed in the Indian
mentality as the highest object of the soul, has replaced the enjoyment of a heaven beyond fixed in the mentality
of the devout by many religions
Page 268

as their divine lure. Indian religion also upheld that earlier and lower call when the gross external interpretation of
the Vedic hymns was the dominant creed, and the dualists in later India also have kept that as part of their
supreme spiritual motive. Undoubtedly a release from the limitations of the mind and body into an eternal peace,
rest, silence of the Spirit, makes a higher appeal than the offer of a heaven of mental joys or eternised physical
pleasures, but this too after all is a lure; its insistence on the mind's world-weariness, the life-being's shrinking
from the adventure of birth, strikes a chord of weakness and cannot be the supreme motive. The desire of
personal salvation, however high its form, is an outcome of ego; it rests on the idea of our own individuality and
its desire for its personal good or welfare, its longing for a release from suffering or its cry for the extinction of
the trouble of becoming and makes that the supreme aim of our existence. To rise beyond the desire of personal
salvation is necessary for the complete rejection of this basis of ego. If we seek the Divine, it should be for the
sake of the Divine and for nothing else, because that is the supreme call of our being, the deepest truth of the
spirit. The pursuit of liberation, of the soul's freedom, of the realisation of our true and highest self, of union with
the Divine, is justified only because it is the highest law of our nature, because it is the attraction of that which is
lower in us to that which is highest, because it is the Divine Will in us. That is its sufficient justification and its
one truest reason; all other motives are excrescences, minor or incidental truths or useful lures which the soul
must abandon, the moment their utility has passed and the state of oneness with the Supreme and with all beings
has become our normal consciousness and the bliss of that state our spiritual atmosphere.
\par Often, we see this desire of personal salvation overcome by another attraction which also belongs to the
higher turn of our nature and which indicates the essential character of the action the liberated soul must pursue.
It is that which is implied in the great legend of the Amitabha Buddha who turned away when his spirit was on
the threshold of Nirvana and took the vow never to cross it while a single being remained in the sorrow
Page 269

and the Ignorance. It is that which underlies the sublime verse of the Bhagavata Purana, “I desire not the
supreme state with all its eight siddhis nor the cessation of rebirth; may I assume the sorrow of all creatures who
suffer and enter into them so that they may be made free from grief.” It is that which inspires a remarkable
passage in a letter of Swami Vivekananda. “I have lost all wish for my salvation,” wrote the great Vedantin,
“may I be born again and again and suffer thousands of miseries so that I may worship the only God that exists,
the only God I believe in, the sum-total of all souls,—and above all, my God the wicked, my God the miserable,
my God the poor of all races, of all species is the special object of my worship. He who is the high and low, the
saint and the sinner, the god and the worm, Him worship, the visible, the knowable, the real, the omnipresent;
break all other idols. In whom there is neither past life nor future birth, nor death nor going nor coming, in whom
we always have been and always will be one, Him worship; break all other idols.”
\par The last two sentences contain indeed the whole gist of the matter. The true salvation or the true freedom
from the chain of rebirth is not the rejection of terrestrial life or the individual's escape by a spiritual
self-annihilation, even as the true renunciation is not the mere physical abandonment of family and society; it is
the inner identification with the Divine in whom there is no limitation of past life and future birth but instead the
eternal existence of the unborn Soul. He who is free inwardly, even doing actions, does nothing at all, says the
Gita; for it is Nature that works in him under the control of the Lord of Nature. Equally, even if he assumes a
hundred times the body, he is free from any chain of birth or mechanical wheel of existence since he lives in the
unborn and undying spirit and not in the life of the body. Therefore attachment to the escape from rebirth is one
of the idols which, whoever keeps, the sadhaka of the integral Yoga must break and cast away from him. For his
Yoga is not limited to the realisation of the Transcendent beyond all world by the individual soul; it embraces also
the realisation of the Universal, “the sum-total of all souls”, and cannot therefore be confined to the movement of
a personal salvation and escape.
Page 270

Even in his transcendence of cosmic limitations he is still one with all in God; a divine work remains for him in the
universe.
\par
\tstar
\par That work cannot be fixed by any mind-made rule or human standard; for his consciousness has moved
away from human law and limits and passed into the divine liberty, away from government by the external and
transient into the self-rule of the inner and eternal, away from the binding forms of the finite into the free
self-determination of the Infinite. “Howsoever he lives and acts,” says the Gita, “he lives and acts in Me.” The
rules which the intellect of men lays down cannot apply to the liberated soul,—by the external criteria and tests
which their mental associations and prejudgments prescribe, such a one cannot be judged; he is outside the
narrow jurisdiction of these fallible tribunals. It is immaterial whether he wears the garb of the ascetic or lives the
full life of the householder; whether he spends his days in what men call holy works or in the many-sided
activities of the world; whether he devotes himself to the direct leading of men to the Light like Buddha, Christ or
Shankara or governs kingdoms like Janaka or stands before men like Sri Krishna as a politician or a leader of
armies; what he eats or drinks; what are his habits or his pursuits; whether he fails or succeeds; whether his
work be one of construction or of destruction; whether he supports or restores an old order or labours to replace
it by a new; whether his associates are those whom men delight to honour or those whom their sense of superior
righteousness outcastes and reprobates; whether his life and deeds are approved by his contemporaries or he is
condemned as a misleader of men and a fomenter of religious, moral or social heresies. He is not governed by
the judgments of men or the laws laid down by the ignorant; he obeys an inner voice and is moved by an unseen
Power. His real life is within and this is its description that he lives, moves and acts in God, in the Divine, in the
Infinite.
\par But if his action is governed by no external rule, one rule it will observe that is not external; it will be dictated
by no personal
Page 271

desire or aim, but will be a part of a conscious and eventually a well-ordered because self-ordered divine working
in the world. The Gita declares that the action of the liberated man must be directed not by desire, but towards
the keeping together of the world, its government, guidance, impulsion, maintenance in the path appointed to it.
This injunction has been interpreted in the sense that the world being an illusion in which most men must be kept,
since they are unfit for liberation, he must so act outwardly as to cherish in them an attachment to their
customary works laid down for them by the social law. If so, it would be a poor and petty rule and every noble
heart would reject it to follow rather the divine vow of Amitabha Buddha, the sublime prayer of the Bhagavata,
the passionate aspiration of Vivekananda. But if we accept rather the view that the world is a divinely guided
movement of Nature emerging in man towards God and that this is the work in which the Lord of the Gita
declares that he is ever occupied although he himself has nothing ungained that he has yet to win, then a deep
and true sense will appear for this great injunction. To participate in that divine work, to live for God in the world
will be the rule of the Karmayogin; to live for God in the world and therefore so to act that the Divine may more
and more manifest himself and the world go forward by whatever way of its obscure pilgrimage and move
nearer to the divine ideal.
\par How he shall do this, in what particular way, can be decided by no general rule. It must develop or define
itself from within; the decision lies between God and our self, the Supreme Self and the individual self that is the
instrument of the work; even before liberation, it is from the inner self, as soon as we become conscious of it,
that there rises the sanction, the spiritually determined choice. It is altogether from within that must come the
knowledge of the work that has to be done. There is no particular work, no law or form or outwardly fixed or
invariable way of works which can be said to be that of the liberated being. The phrase used in the Gita to
express this work that has to be done has indeed been interpreted in the sense that we must do our duty without
regard to the fruit. But this is a conception born of European culture which is ethical rather than spiritual and
Page 272

external rather than inwardly profound in its concepts. No such general thing as duty exists; we have only duties,
often in conflict with each other, and these are determined by our environment, our social relations, our external
status in life. They are of great value in training the immature moral nature and setting up a standard which
discourages the action of selfish desire. It has already been said that so long as the seeker has no inner light, he
must govern himself by the best light he has, and duty, a principle, a cause are among the standards he may
temporarily erect and observe. But for all that, duties are external things, not stuff of the soul and cannot be the
ultimate standard of action in this path. It is the duty of the soldier to fight when called upon, even to fire upon his
own kith and kin; but such a standard or any akin to it cannot be imposed on the liberated man. On the other
hand, to love or have compassion, to obey the highest truth of our being, to follow the command of the Divine are
not duties; these things are a law of the nature as it rises towards the Divine, an outflowing of action from a
soul-state, a high reality of the spirit. The action of the liberated doer of works must be even such an outflowing
from the soul; it must come to him or out of him as a natural result of his spiritual union with the Divine and not
be formed by an edifying construction of the mental thought and will, the practical reason or the social sense. In
the ordinary life a personal, social or traditional constructed rule, standard or ideal is the guide; once the spiritual
journey has begun, this must be replaced by an inner and outer rule or way of living necessary for our
self-discipline, liberation and perfection, a way of living proper to the path we follow or enjoined by the spiritual
guide and master, the Guru, or else dictated by a Guide within us. But in the last state of the soul's infinity and
freedom all outward standards are replaced or laid aside and there is left only a spontaneous and integral
obedience to the Divine with whom we are in union and an action spontaneously fulfilling the integral spiritual
truth of our being and nature.
\par
\tstar
Page 273

\par It is this deeper sense in which we must accept the dictum of the Gita that action determined and
governed by the nature must be our law of works. It is not, certainly, the superficial temperament or the
character or habitual impulses that are meant, but in the literal sense of the Sanskrit word our “own being”, our
essential nature, the divine stuff of our souls. Whatever springs from this root or flows from these sources is
profound, essential, right; the rest—opinions, impulses, habits, desires—may be merely surface formations or
casual vagaries of the being or impositions from outside. They shift and change, but this remains constant. It is
not the executive forms taken by Nature in us that are ourselves or the abidingly constant and expressive shape
of ourselves; it is the spiritual being in us—and this includes the soul-becoming of it—that persists through time in
the universe.
\par We cannot, however, easily distinguish this true inner law of our being; it is kept screened from us so long as
the heart and intellect remain unpurified from egoism: till then we follow \NH superficial and impermanent ideas,
impulses, desires, suggestions and impositions of all kinds from our environment or work out formations of our
temporary mental, vital, physical personality—that passing experimental and structural self which has been made
for us by an interaction between our being and the pressure of a lower cosmic Nature. In proportion as we are
purified, the true being within declares itself more clearly; our will is less entangled in suggestions from outside or
shut up in our own superficial mental constructions. Egoism renounced, the nature purified, action will come from
the soul's dictates, from the depths or the heights of the spirit, or it will be openly governed by the Lord who was
all the time seated secretly within our hearts. The supreme and final word of the Gita for the Yogin is that he
should leave all conventional formulas of belief and action, all fixed and external rules of conduct, all
constructions of the outward or surface Nature, \s{dharmas}, and take refuge in the Divine alone. Free from
desire and attachment, one with all beings, living in the infinite Truth and Purity and acting out of the profoundest
deeps of his inner consciousness, governed by his immortal, divine and highest Self, all his works will be
Page 274

directed by the Power within through that essential spirit and nature in us which, knowing, warring, working,
loving, serving, is always divine, towards the fulfilment of God in the world, an expression of the Eternal in Time.
\par A divine action arising spontaneously, freely, infallibly from the light and force of our spiritual self in union
with the Divine is the last state of this integral Yoga of Works. The truest reason why we must seek liberation is
not to be delivered, individually, from the sorrow of the world, though that deliverance too will be given to us, but
that we may be one with the Divine, the Supreme, the Eternal. The truest reason why we must seek perfection,
a supreme status, purity, knowledge, strength, love, capacity, is not that personally we may enjoy the divine
Nature or be even as the gods, though that enjoyment too will be ours, but because this liberation and perfection
are the divine Will in us, the highest truth of our self in Nature, the always intended goal of a progressive
manifestation in the universe. The divine Nature, free and perfect and blissful, must be manifested in the
individual in order that it may manifest in the world. Even in the Ignorance the individual lives really in the
universal and for the universal Purpose, for in the very act of pursuing the purposes and desires of his ego, he is
forced by Nature to contribute by his egoistic action to her work and purpose in the worlds; but it is without
conscious intention, imperfectly done, and his contribution is to her half-evolved and half-conscient, her imperfect
and crude movement. To escape from ego and be united with the Divine is at once the liberation and the
consummation of his individuality; so liberated, purified, perfected, the individual—the divine soul—lives
consciously and entirely, as was from the first intended, in and for the cosmic and transcendent Divine and for
his Will in the universe.
\par In the Way of Knowledge we may arrive at a point where we can leap out of personality and universe,
escape from all thought and will and works and all way of Nature and, absorbed and taken up into Eternity,
plunge into the Transcendence; that, though not obligatory on the God-knower, may be the soul's decision, the
turn pursued by the self within us. In the Way of
Page 275

Devotion we may reach through an intensity of adoration and joy union with the supreme All-Beloved and remain
eternally in the ecstasy of his presence, absorbed in him alone, intimately in one world of bliss with him; that then
may be our being's impulsion, its spiritual choice. But in the Way of Works another prospect opens; for travelling
on that path, we can enter into liberation and perfection by becoming of one law and power of nature with the
Eternal; we are identified with him in our will and dynamic self as much as in our spiritual status; a divine way of
works is the natural outcome of this union, a divine living in a spiritual freedom the body of its self-expression. In
the Integral Yoga these three lines of approach give up their exclusions, meet and coalesce or spring out of each
other; liberated from the mind's veil over the self, we live in the Transcendence, enter by the adoration of the
heart into the oneness of a supreme love and bliss, and all our forces of being uplifted into the one Force, our will
and works surrendered into the one Will and Power, assume the dynamic perfection of the divine Nature.

\preface
\par
Page 276

\ht Appendix\nl to Part I
\par\nodrop
The following chapter was left unfinished. It was not included in the edition of {\it The Synthesis of Yoga},
Part I, that was published during Sri Aurobindo's lifetime.

\chapter
\par
Page 277

\hn Chapter XIII
\par
\ht The Supermind and the\nl Yoga of Works
\par\drop An integral Yoga includes as a vital and indispensable element in its total and ultimate aim the
conversion of the whole being into a higher spiritual consciousness and a larger divine existence. Our parts of will
and action, our parts of knowledge, our thinking being, our emotional being, our being of life, all our self and
nature must seek the Divine, enter into the Infinite, unite with the Eternal. But man's present nature is limited,
divided, unequal,—it is easiest for him to concentrate in the strongest part of his being and follow a definite line
of progress proper to his nature: only rare individuals have the strength to take a large immediate plunge straight
into the sea of the Divine Infinity. Some therefore must choose as a starting-point a concentration in thought or
contemplation or the mind's one-pointedness to find the eternal reality of the Self in them; others can more easily
withdraw into the heart to meet there the Divine, the Eternal: yet others are predominantly dynamic and active;
for these it is best to centre themselves in the will and enlarge their being through works. United with the Self
and source of all by their surrender of their will into its infinity, guided in their works by the secret Divinity within
or surrendered to the Lord of the cosmic action as the master and mover of all their energies of thought, feeling,
act, becoming by this enlargement of being selfless and universal, they can reach by works some first fullness of
a spiritual status. But the path, whatever its point of starting, must debouch into a vaster dominion; it must
proceed in the end through a totality of integrated knowledge, emotion, will of dynamic action, perfection of the
being and the entire nature. In the supramental consciousness, on the level of the supramental existence this
integration becomes consummate;
Page 279

there knowledge, will, emotion, the perfection of the self and the dynamic nature rise each to its absolute of itself
and all to their perfect harmony and fusion with each other, to a divine integrality, a divine perfection. For the
supermind is a Truth-Consciousness in which the Divine Reality, fully manifested, no longer works with the
instrumentation of the Ignorance; a truth of status of being which is absolute becomes dynamic in a truth of
energy and activity of the being which is self-existent and perfect. Every movement there is a movement of the
self-aware truth of Divine Being and every part is in entire harmony with the whole. Even the most limited and
finite action is in the Truth-Consciousness a movement of the Eternal and Infinite and partakes of the inherent
absoluteness and perfection of the Eternal and Infinite. An ascent into the supramental Truth not only raises our
spiritual and essential consciousness to that height but brings about a descent of this Light and Truth into all our
being and all our parts of nature. All then becomes part of the Divine Truth, an element and means of the
supreme union and oneness; this ascent and descent must be therefore an ultimate aim of this Yoga.
\par A union with the Divine Reality of our being and all being is the one essential object of the Yoga. It is
necessary to keep this in mind; we must remember that our Yoga is not undertaken for the sake of the
acquisition of supermind itself but for the sake of the Divine; we seek the supermind not for its own joy and
greatness but to make the union absolute and complete, to feel it, possess it, dynamise it in every possible way of
our being, in its highest intensities and largest widenesses and in every range and turn and nook and recess of our
nature. It is a mistake to think, as many are apt to think, that the object of a supramental Yoga is to arrive at a
mighty magnificence of supermanhood, a divine power and greatness, the self-fulfilment of a magnified individual
personality. This is a false and disastrous conception,—disastrous because it is likely to raise the pride, vanity and
ambition of the rajasic vital mind in us and that, if not overpassed and overcome, must lead to spiritual downfall,
false because it is an egoistic conception and the first condition of the supramental change is to get rid of ego. It
is most dangerous for the active and
Page 280

dynamic nature of the man of will and works which can easily be led away by the pursuit of power. Power
comes inevitably by the supramental change, it is a necessary condition for a perfect action: but it is the Divine
Shakti that comes and takes up the nature and the life, the power of the One acting through the spiritual
individual; it is not an aggrandisement of the personal force, not the last crowning fulfilment of the separative
mental and vital ego. Self-fulfilment is a result of the Yoga, but its aim is not the greatness of the individual. The
sole aim is a spiritual perfection, a finding of the true self and a union with the Divine by putting on the divine
consciousness and nature.
\note{\s{s\=adharmya mukti}.} All the rest is constituent detail and attendant circumstance. Ego-centric impulses,
ambition, desire of power and greatness, motives of self-assertion are foreign to this greater consciousness and
would be an insuperable bar against any possibility of even a distant approach towards the supramental change.
One must lose one's little lower self to find the greater self. Union with the Divine must be the master motive;
even the discovery of the truth of one's own being and of all being, life in that truth and its greater consciousness,
perfection of the nature are only the natural results of that movement. Indispensable conditions of its entire
consummation, they are part of the central aim only because they are a necessary development and a major
consequence.
\par It must also be kept in mind that the supramental change is difficult, distant, an ultimate stage; it must be
regarded as the end of a far-off vista; it cannot be and must not be turned into a first aim, a constantly envisaged
goal or an immediate objective. For it can only come into the view of possibility after much arduous self-conquest
and self-exceeding, at the end of many long and trying stages of a difficult self-evolution of the nature. One must
first acquire an inner Yogic consciousness and replace by it our ordinary view of things, natural movements,
motives of life; one must revolutionise the whole present build of our being. Next, we have to go still deeper,
discover our veiled psychic entity and
Page 281

in its light and under its government psychicise our inner and outer parts, turn mind-nature, life-nature,
body-nature and all our mental, vital, physical action and states and movements into a conscious instrumentation
of the soul. Afterwards or concurrently we have to spiritualise the being in its entirety by a descent of a divine
Light, Force, Purity, Knowledge, freedom and wideness. It is necessary to break down the limits of the personal
mind, life and physicality, dissolve the ego, enter into the cosmic consciousness, realise the self, acquire a
spiritualised and universalised mind and heart, life-force, physical consciousness. Then only the passage into
supramental consciousness begins to become possible, and even then there is a difficult ascent to make each
stage of which is a separate arduous achievement. Yoga is a rapid and concentrated conscious evolution of the
being, but however rapid, even though it may effect in a single life what in an unassisted Nature might take
centuries and millenniums or many hundreds of lives, still all evolution must move by stages; even the greatest
rapidity and concentration of the movement cannot swallow up all the stages or reverse natural process and bring
the end near to the beginning. A hasty and ignorant mind, a too eager force easily forget this necessity; they rush
forward to make the supermind an immediate aim and expect to pull it down with a pitchfork from its highest
heights in the Infinite. This is not only an absurd expectation but full of danger. For the vital desire may very well
bring in an action of dark or vehement vital powers which hold out before it a promise of immediate fulfilment of
its impossible longing; the consequence is likely to be a plunge into many kinds of self-deception, a yielding to the
falsehoods and temptations of the forces of darkness, a hunt for supernormal powers, a turning away from the
Divine to the Asuric nature, a fatal self-inflation into an unnatural unhuman and undivine bigness of magnified
ego. If the being is small, the nature weak and incapable, there is not this large-scale disaster; but a loss of
balance, a mental unhinging and fall into unreason or a vital unhinging and consequent moral aberration or a
deviation into some kind of morbid abnormality of the nature may be the untoward consequence. This is not a
Yoga in which
Page 282

abnormality of any kind, even if it be an exalted abnormality, can be admitted as a way to self-fulfilment or
spiritual realisation. Even when one enters into supernormal and suprarational experience, there should be no
disturbance of the poise which must be kept firm from the summit of the consciousness to its base; the
experiencing consciousness must preserve a calm balance, an unfailing clarity and order in its observation, a sort
of sublimated commonsense, an unfailing power of self-criticism, right discrimination, coordination and firm vision
of things; a sane grasp on facts and a high spiritualised positivism must always be there. It is not by becoming
irrational or infrarational that one can go beyond ordinary nature into supernature; it should be done by passing
through reason to a greater light of superreason. This superreason descends into reason and takes it up into
higher levels even while breaking its limitations; reason is not lost but changes and becomes its own true
unlimited self, a coordinating power of the supernature.
\par Another error that has to be guarded against is also one to which our mentality is easily prone; it is to take
some higher intermediate consciousness or even any kind of supernormal consciousness for the supermind. To
reach supermind it is not enough to go above the ordinary movements of the human mind; it is not enough to
receive a greater light, a greater power, a greater joy or to develop capacities of knowledge, sight, effective will
that surpass the normal range of the human being. All light is not the light of the spirit, still less is all light the light
of the supermind; the mind, the vital, the physical itself have lights of their own, as yet hidden, which can be very
inspiring, exalting, informative, powerfully executive. A breaking out into the cosmic consciousness may also
bring in an immense enlargement of the consciousness and power. An opening into the inner mind, inner vital,
inner physical, any range of the subliminal consciousness, can liberate an activity of abnormal or supernormal
powers of knowledge, action or experience which the uninstructed mind can easily mistake for spiritual
revelations, inspirations, intuitions. An opening upward into the greater ranges of the higher mental being can
bring down much light and force creating
Page 283

an \NH intense activity of the intuitivised mind and life-power or an ascent into these ranges can bring a true but
still incomplete light easily exposed to mixture, a light which is spiritual in its source though it does not always
remain spiritual in its active character when it comes down into the lower nature. But none of these things is the
supramental light, the supramental power; that can only be seen and grasped when we have reached the summits
of mental being, entered into overmind and stand on the borders of an upper, a greater hemisphere of spiritual
existence. There the ignorance, the inconscience, the original blank Nescience slowly awaking towards a
half-knowledge, which are the basis of \NH material Nature and which surround, penetrate and powerfully limit
all our powers of mind and life, cease altogether; for an unmixed and unmodified Truth-consciousness is there
the substance of all the being, its pure spiritual texture. To imagine that we have reached such a condition when
we are still moving in the dynamics of the Ignorance, though it may be an enlightened or \NH illumined
Ignorance, is to lay ourselves open either to a disastrous misleading or to an arrest of the evolution of the being.
For if it is some inferior state that we thus mistake for the supermind, it lays us open to all the dangers we have
seen to attend a presumptuous egoistic haste in our demand for achievement. If it is one of the higher states that
we presume to be the highest, we may, though we achieve much, yet fall short of the greater, more perfect goal
of our being; for we shall remain content with an approximation and the supreme transformation will escape us.
Even the achievement of a complete inner liberation and a high spiritual consciousness is not that supreme
transformation; for we may have that achievement, a status perfect in itself, in essence, and still our dynamic
parts may in their instrumentation belong to an enlightened spiritualised mind and may be in consequence, like all
mind, defective even in its greater power and knowledge, still subject to a partial or local obscuration or a
limitation by the original circumscribing nescience.
\par
\tstar

\part
\par
Page 284

\hn Part II
\par
\ht The Yoga of Integral Knowledge

\chapter
\par
Page 285

\hn Chapter I
\par
\ht The Object of Knowledge
\par\drop All spiritual seeking moves towards an object of Knowledge to which men ordinarily do not turn the
eye of the mind, to someone or something Eternal, Infinite, Absolute that is not the temporal things or forces of
which we are sensible, although he or it may be in them or behind them or their source or creator. It aims at a
state of knowledge by which we can touch, enter or know by identity this Eternal, Infinite and Absolute, a
consciousness other than our ordinary consciousness of ideas and forms and things, a Knowledge that is not
what we call knowledge but something self-existent, everlasting, infinite. And although it may or even necessarily
must, since man is a mental creature, start from our ordinary instruments of knowledge, yet it must as necessarily
go beyond them and use supra-sensuous and supramental means and faculties, for it is in search of something
that is itself supra-sensuous and supramental and beyond the grasp of the mind and senses, even if through mind
and sense there can come a first glimpse of it or a reflected image.
\par The traditional systems, whatever their other differences, all proceed on the belief or the perception that the
Eternal and Absolute can only be or at least can only inhabit a pure transcendent state of non-cosmic existence
or else a non-existence. All cosmic existence or all that we call existence is a state of ignorance. Even the
highest individual perfection, even the most blissful cosmic condition is no better than a supreme ignorance. All
that is individual, all that is cosmic has to be austerely renounced by the seeker of the absolute Truth. The
supreme quiescent Self or else the absolute Nihil is the sole Truth, the only object of spiritual knowledge. The
state of knowledge, the consciousness other than this temporal that we must attain is Nirvana, an extinction of
ego, a cessation of all mental, vital
Page 287

and physical activities, of all activities whatsoever, a supreme illumined quiescence, the pure bliss of an
impersonal tranquillity self-absorbed and ineffable. The means are meditation, a concentration excluding all things
else, a total loss of the mind in its object. Action is permissible only in the first stages of the search in order to
purify the seeker and make him morally and temperamentally a fit vessel for the knowledge. Even this action
must either be confined to the performance of the rites of worship and the prescribed duties of life rigorously
ordained by the Hindu Shastra or, as in the Buddhistic discipline, must be guided along the eightfold path to the
supreme practice of the works of compassion which lead towards the practical annihilation of self in the good of
others. In the end, in any severe and pure Jnanayoga, all works must be abandoned for an entire quiescence.
Action may prepare salvation; it cannot give it. Any continued adherence to action is incompatible with the
highest progress and may be an insuperable obstacle to the attainment of the spiritual goal. The supreme state of
quiescence is the very opposite of action and cannot be attained by those who persist in works. And even
devotion, love, worship are disciplines for the unripe soul, are at best the best methods of the Ignorance. For they
are offered to something other, higher and greater than ourselves; but in the supreme knowledge there can be no
such thing, since there is either only one self or no self at all and therefore either no one to do the worship and
offer the love and devotion or no one to receive it. Even thought-activity must disappear in the sole
consciousness of identity or of nothingness and by its own quiescence bring about the quiescence of the whole
nature. The absolute Identical alone must remain or else the eternal Nihil.
\par This pure Jnanayoga comes by the intellect, although it ends in the transcendence of the intellect and its
workings. The thinker in us separates himself from all the rest of what we phenomenally are, rejects the heart,
draws back from the life and the senses, separates from the body that he may arrive at his own exclusive
fulfilment in that which is beyond even himself and his function. There is a truth that underlies, as there is
Page 288

an experience that seems to justify this attitude. There is an Essence that is in its nature a quiescence, a supreme
of Silence in the Being that is beyond its own developments and mutations, immutable and therefore superior to
all activities of which it is at most a Witness. And in the hierarchy of our psychological functions the Thought is
in a way nearest to this Self, nearest at least to its aspect of the all-conscious knower who regards all activities
but can stand back from them all. The heart, will and other powers in us are fundamentally active, turn naturally
towards action, find through it their fulfilment,—although they also may automatically arrive at a certain
quiescence by fullness of satisfaction in their activities or else by a reverse process of exhaustion through
perpetual disappointment and dissatisfaction. The thought too is an active power, but is more capable of arriving
at quiescence by its own conscious choice and will. The thought is more easily content with the illumined
intellectual perception of this silent Witness Self that is higher than all our activities and, that immobile Spirit once
seen, is ready, deeming its mission of truth-finding accomplished, to fall at rest and become itself immobile. For in
its most characteristic movement it is itself apt to be a disinterested witness, judge, observer of things more than
an eager participant and passionate labourer in the work and can arrive very readily at a spiritual or philosophic
calm and detached aloofness. And since men are mental beings, thought, if not truly their best and highest, is at
least their most constant, normal and effective means for enlightening their ignorance. Armed with its functions
of gathering and reflection, meditation, fixed contemplation, the absorbed dwelling of the mind on its object,
\s{\'srava\,na}, \s{manana}, \s{nididhy\=asana}, it stands at our tops as an indispensable aid to our realisation of that
which we pursue, and it is not surprising that it should claim to be the leader of the journey and the only available
guide or at least the direct and innermost door of the temple.
\par In reality, thought is only a scout and pioneer; it can guide but not command or effectuate. The leader of the
journey, the captain of the march, the first and most ancient priest of our sacrifice is the Will. This Will is not the
wish of the heart or
Page 289

the demand or preference of the mind to which we often give the name. It is that inmost, dominant and often
veiled conscious force of our being and of all being, Tapas, Shakti, Sraddha, that sovereignly determines our
orientation and of which the intellect and the heart are more or less blind and automatic servants and instruments.
The Self that is quiescent, at rest, vacant of things and happenings is a support and background to existence, a
silent channel or a hypostasis of something Supreme: it is not itself the one entirely real existence, not itself the
Supreme. The Eternal, the Supreme is the Lord and the all-originating Spirit. Superior to all activities and not
bound by any of them, it is the source, sanction, material, efficient power, master of all activities. All activities
proceed from this supreme Self and are determined by it; all are its operations, processes of its own conscious
force and not of something alien to Self, some power other than the Spirit. In these activities is expressed the
conscious Will or Shakti of the Spirit moved to manifest its being in infinite ways, a Will or Power not ignorant
but at one with its own self-knowledge and its knowledge of all that it is put out to express. And of this Power a
secret spiritual will and soul-faith in us, the dominant hidden force of our nature, is the individual instrument, more
nearly in communication with the Supreme, a surer guide and enlightener, could we once get at it and hold it,
because profounder and more intimately near to the Identical and Absolute than the surface activities of our
thought powers. To know that will in ourselves and in the universe and follow it to its divine finalities, whatever
these may be, must surely be the highest way and truest culmination for knowledge as for works, for the seeker
in life and for the seeker in Yoga.
\par The thought, since it is not the highest or strongest part of Nature, not even the sole or deepest index to
Truth, ought not to follow its own exclusive satisfaction or take that for the sign of its attainment to the supreme
Knowledge. It is here as the guide, up to a certain point, of the heart, the life and the other members, but it
cannot be a substitute for them; it has to see not only what is its own ultimate satisfaction but whether there is
not an ultimate satisfaction intended also for these other
Page 290

members. An exclusive path of abstract thought would be justified, only if the object of the Supreme Will in the
universe has been nothing more than a descent into the activity of the ignorance operated by the mind as blinding
instrument and jailor through false idea and sensation and an ascent into the quiescence of knowledge equally
operated by the mind through correct thought as enlightening instrument and saviour. But the chances are that
there is an aim in the world less absurd and aimless, an impulse towards the Absolute less dry and abstract, a
truth of the world more large and complex, a more richly infinite height of the Infinite. Certainly, an abstract logic
must always arrive, as the old systems arrived, at an infinite empty Negation or an infinite equally vacant
Affirmation; for, abstract it moves towards an absolute abstraction and these are the only two abstractions that
are absolutely absolute. But a concrete ever deepening wisdom waiting on more and more riches of infinite
experience and not the confident abstract logic of the narrow and incompetent human mind is likely to be the key
to a divine suprahuman knowledge. The heart, the will, the life and even the body, no less than the thought, are
forms of a divine Conscious-Being and indices of great significance. These too have powers by which the soul
can return to its complete self-awareness or means by which it can enjoy it. The object of the Supreme Will may
well be a culmination in which the whole being is intended to receive its divine satisfaction, the heights
enlightening the depths, the material Inconscient revealed to itself as the Divine by the touch of the supreme
Superconscience.
\par The traditional Way of Knowledge proceeds by elimination and rejects successively the body, the life, the
senses, the heart, the very thought in order to merge into the quiescent Self or supreme Nihil or indefinite
Absolute. The way of integral knowledge supposes that we are intended to arrive at an integral self-fulfilment
and the only thing that is to be eliminated is our own unconsciousness, the Ignorance and the results of the
Ignorance. Eliminate the falsity of the being which figures as the ego; then our true being can manifest in us.
Eliminate the falsity of the life which figures as mere vital craving and the mechanical
Page 291

round of our corporeal existence; our true life in the power of the Godhead and the joy of the Infinite will appear.
Eliminate the falsity of the senses with their subjection to material shows and to dual sensations; there is a
greater sense in us that can open through these to the Divine in things and divinely reply to it. Eliminate the falsity
of the heart with its turbid passions and desires and its dual emotions; a deeper heart in us can open with its
divine love for all creatures and its infinite passion and yearning for the responses of the Infinite. Eliminate the
falsity of the thought with its imperfect mental constructions, its arrogant assertions and denials, its limited and
exclusive concentrations; a greater faculty of knowledge is behind that can open to the true Truth of God and the
soul and Nature and the universe. An integral self-fulfilment,—an absolute, a culmination for the experiences of
the heart, for its instinct of love, joy, devotion and worship; an absolute, a culmination for the senses, for their
pursuit of divine beauty and good and delight in the forms of things; an absolute, a culmination for the life, for its
pursuit of works, of divine power, mastery and perfection; an absolute, a culmination beyond its own limits for the
thought, for its hunger after truth and light and divine wisdom and knowledge. Not something quite other than
themselves from which they are all cast away is the end of these things in our nature, but something supreme in
which they at once transcend themselves and find their own absolutes and infinitudes, their harmonies beyond
measure.
\par Behind the traditional way of Knowledge, justifying its thought-process of elimination and withdrawal, stands
an overmastering spiritual experience. Deep, intense, convincing, common to all who have overstepped a certain
limit of the active mind-belt into horizonless inner space, this is the great experience of liberation, the
consciousness of something within us that is behind and outside of the universe and all its forms, interests, aims,
events and happenings, calm, untouched, unconcerned, illimitable, immobile, free, the uplook to something above
us indescribable and unseizable into which by abolition of our personality we can enter, the presence of an
omnipresent eternal
Page 292

witness Purusha, the sense of an Infinity or a Timelessness that looks down on us from an august negation of all
our existence and is alone the one thing Real. This experience is the highest sublimation of spiritualised mind
looking resolutely beyond its own existence. No one who has not passed through this liberation can be entirely
free from the mind and its meshes, but one is not compelled to linger in this experience for ever. Great as it is, it
is only the Mind's overwhelming experience of what is beyond itself and all it can conceive. It is a supreme
negative experience, but beyond it is all the tremendous light of an infinite Consciousness, an illimitable
Knowledge, an affirmative absolute Presence.
\par The object of spiritual knowledge is the Supreme, the Divine, the Infinite and Absolute. This Supreme has its
relations to our individual being and its relations to the universe and it transcends both the soul and the universe.
Neither the universe nor the individual are what they seem to be, for the report of them which our mind and our
senses give us is, so long as they are unenlightened by a faculty of higher supramental and suprasensuous
knowledge, a false report, an imperfect construction, an attenuated and erroneous figure. And yet that which the
universe and the individual seem to be is still a figure of what they really are, a figure that points beyond itself to
the reality behind it. Truth proceeds by a correction of the values our mind and senses give us, and first by the
action of a higher intelligence that enlightens and sets right as far as may be the conclusions of the ignorant
sense-mind and limited physical intelligence; that is the method of all human knowledge and science. But beyond
it there is a knowledge, a Truth-consciousness, that exceeds our intellect and brings us into the true light of which
it is a refracted ray. There the abstract terms of the pure reason and the constructions of the mind disappear or
are converted into concrete soul-vision and the tremendous actuality of spiritual experience. This knowledge can
turn away to the absolute Eternal and lose vision of the soul and the universe; but it can too see this existence
from that Eternal. When that is done, we find that the ignorance of the mind and the senses and all the apparent
futilities of
Page 293

human life were not a useless excursion of the conscious being, an otiose blunder. Here they were planned as a
rough ground for the self-expression of the Soul that comes from the Infinite, a material foundation for its
self-unfolding and self-possessing in the terms of the universe. It is true that in themselves they and all that is
here have no significance and to build separate significances for them is to live in an illusion, Maya; but they have
a supreme significance in the Supreme, an absolute Power in the Absolute and it is that that assigns to them and
refers to that Truth their present relative values. This is the all-uniting experience that is the foundation of the
deepest integral and most intimate self-knowledge and world-knowledge.
\par In relation to the individual the Supreme is our own true and highest self, that which ultimately we are in our
essence, that of which we are in our manifested nature. A spiritual knowledge, moved to arrive at the true Self in
us, must reject, as the traditional way of knowledge rejects, all misleading appearances. It must discover that the
body is not our self, our foundation of existence; it is a sensible form of the Infinite. The experience of Matter as
the world's sole foundation and the physical brain and nerves and cells and molecules as the one truth of all
things in us, the ponderous inadequate basis of materialism, is a delusion, a half-view taken for the whole, the
dark bottom or shadow of things misconceived as the luminous substance, the effective figure of zero for the
Integer. The materialist idea mistakes a creation for the creative Power, a means of expression for That which is
expressed and expresses. Matter and our physical brain and nerves and body are the field and foundation for one
action of a vital force that serves to connect the Self with the form of its works and maintains them by its direct
dynamis. The material movements are an exterior notation by which the soul represents its perceptions of certain
truths of the Infinite and makes them effective in the terms of Substance. These things are a language, a
notation, a hieroglyphic, a system of symbols, not themselves the deepest truest sense of the things they intimate.
\par Neither is the Life ourself, the vitality, the energy which plays in the brain, nerves and body; it is a power
and not the
Page 294

whole power of the Infinite. The experience of a life-force instrumentalising Matter as the foundation, source
and true sum of all things, the vibrating unsteady basis of vitalism, is a delusion, a half-view taken for the whole, a
tide on a near shore misconceived as all the ocean and its waters. The vitalist idea takes something powerful but
outward for the essence. Life-force is the dynamisation of a consciousness which exceeds it. That
consciousness is felt and acts but does not become valid to us in intelligence until we arrive at the higher term of
Mind, our present summit. Mind is here apparently a creation of Life, but it is really the ulterior—not the
ultimate—sense of Life itself and what is behind it and a more conscious formulation of its secret; Mind is an
expression not of Life, but of that of which Life itself is a less luminous expression.
\par And yet Mind also, our mentality, our thinking, understanding part, is not our Self, is not That, not the end or
the beginning; it is a half-light thrown from the Infinite. The experience of mind as the creator of forms and
things and of these forms and things existing in the Mind only, the thin subtle basis of idealism, is also a delusion,
a half-view taken for the whole, a pale refracted light idealised as the burning body of the Sun and its splendour.
This idealist vision also does not arrive at the essence of being, does not even touch it but only an inferior mode
of Nature. Mind is the dubious outer penumbra of a conscious existence which is not limited by mentality but
exceeds it. The method of the traditional way of knowledge, eliminating all these things, arrives at the conception
and realisation of a pure conscious existence, self-aware, self-blissful, unconditioned by mind and life and body
and to its ultimate positive experience that is Atman, the Self, the original and essential nature of our existence.
Here at last there is something centrally true, but in its haste to arrive at it this knowledge assumes that there is
nothing between the thinking mind and the Highest, \s{buddhe\,h paratas tu sa\,h}, and, shutting its eyes in Samadhi,
tries to rush through all that actually intervenes without even seeing these great and luminous kingdoms of the
Spirit. Perhaps it arrives at its object, but only to fall asleep in the Infinite. Or, if it remains
Page 295

awake, it is in the highest experience of the Supreme into which the self-annulling Mind can enter, but not in the
supreme of the Supreme, Paratpara. The Mind can only be aware of the Self in a mentalised spiritual thinness,
only of the mind-reflected Sachchidananda. The highest truth, the integral self-knowledge is not to be gained by
this self-blinded leap into the Absolute but by a patient transit beyond the mind into the Truth-consciousness
where the Infinite can be known, felt, seen, experienced in all the fullness of its unending riches. And there we
discover this Self that we are to be not only a static tenuous vacant Atman but a great dynamic Spirit individual,
universal and transcendent. That Self and Spirit cannot be expressed by the mind's abstract generalisations; all
the inspired descriptions of the seers and mystics cannot exhaust its contents and its splendours.
\par In relation to the universe the Supreme is Brahman, the one Reality which is not only the spiritual material
and conscious substance of all the ideas and forces and forms of the universe, but their origin, support and
possessor, the cosmic and supracosmic Spirit. All the last terms to which we can reduce the universe, Force and
Matter, Name and Form, Purusha and Prakriti, are still not entirely that which the universe really is, \NH either in
itself or its nature. As all that we are is the play and form, the mental, psychic, vital and physical expression of a
supreme Self unconditioned by mind and life and body, the universe too is the play and form and cosmic
soul-expression and nature-expression of a supreme Existence which is unconditioned by force and matter,
unconditioned by idea and name and form, unconditioned by the fundamental distinction of Purusha and Prakriti.
Our supreme Self and the supreme Existence which has become the universe are one Spirit, one self and one
existence. The individual is in nature one expression of the universal Being, in spirit an emanation of the
Transcendence. For if he finds his self, he finds too that his own true self is not this natural personality, this
created individuality, but is a universal being in its relations with others and with Nature and in its upward term a
portion or the living front of a supreme transcendental Spirit.
\par This supreme Existence is not conditioned by the individual
Page 296

or by the universe. A spiritual knowledge can therefore surpass or even eliminate these two powers of the Spirit
and arrive at the conception of something utterly Transcendent, something that is unnameable and mentally
unknowable, a sheer Absolute. The traditional way of knowledge eliminates individual and universe. The
Absolute it seeks after is featureless, indefinable, relationless, not this, not that, \s{neti neti}. And yet we can say
of it that it is One, that it is Infinite, that it is ineffable Bliss, Consciousness, Existence. Although unknowable to
the mind, yet through our individual being and through the names and forms of the universe we can approach the
realisation of the supreme Self that is Brahman, and by the realisation of the self we come to a certain realisation
also of this utter Absolute of which our true self is the essential form in our consciousness (\s{svar\=upa}). These
are the devices the human mind is compelled to use if it is to form to itself any conception at all of a transcendent
and unconditioned Absolute. The system of negation is indispensable to it in order to get rid of its own definitions
and limited experience; it is obliged to escape through a vague Indefinite into the Infinite. For it lives in a closed
prison of constructions and representations that are necessary for its action but are not the self-existent truth
either of Matter or Life or Mind or Spirit. But if we can once cross beyond the Mind's frontier twilight into the
vast plane of supramental Knowledge, these devices cease to be indispensable. Supermind has quite another, a
positive and direct and living experience of the supreme Infinite. The Absolute is beyond personality and beyond
impersonality, and yet it is both the Impersonal and the supreme Person and all persons. The Absolute is beyond
the distinction of unity and multiplicity, and yet it is the One and the innumerable Many in all the universes. It is
beyond all limitation by quality and yet it is not limited by a qualitiless void but is too all infinite qualities. It is the
individual soul and all souls and none of them; it is the formless Brahman and the universe. It is the cosmic and
the supracosmic Spirit, the supreme Lord, the supreme Self, the supreme Purusha and supreme Shakti, the Ever
Unborn who is endlessly born, the Infinite who is innumerably finite, the multitudinous
Page 297

One, the complex Simple, the many-sided Single, the Word of the Silence Ineffable, the impersonal omnipresent
Person, the Mystery translucent in highest consciousness to its own spirit, but to a lesser consciousness veiled in
its own exceeding light and impenetrable for ever. These things are to the dimensional mind irreconcilable
opposites, but to the constant vision and experience of the supramental Truth-consciousness they are so simply
and inevitably the intrinsic nature of each other that even to think of them as contraries is an unimaginable
violence. The walls constructed by the measuring and separating Intellect have disappeared and the Truth in its
simplicity and beauty appears and reduces all to terms of its harmony and unity and light. Dimensions and
distinctions remain but as figures for use, not a separative prison for the self-forgetting Spirit.
\par The consciousness of the transcendent Absolute with its consequence in individual and universe is the last,
the eternal knowledge. Our minds may deal with it on various lines, may build upon it conflicting philosophies,
may limit, modify, overstress, understress sides of the knowledge, deduce from it truth or error; but our
intellectual variations and imperfect statements make no difference to the ultimate fact that if we push thought
and experience to their end, this is the knowledge in which they terminate. The object of a Yoga of spiritual
knowledge can be nothing else than this eternal Reality, this Self, this Brahman, this Transcendent that dwells
over all and in all and is manifest yet concealed in the individual, manifest yet disguised in the universe.
\par The culmination of the path of knowledge need not necessarily entail extinction of our world-existence. For
the Supreme to whom we assimilate ourselves, the Absolute and Transcendent into whom we enter has always
the complete and ultimate consciousness for which we are seeking and yet he supports by it his play in the world.
Neither are we compelled to believe that our world-existence ends because by attaining to knowledge its object
or consummation is fulfilled and therefore there is nothing more for us here afterwards. For what we gain at first
with its release and immeasurable silence and quietude is only the eternal
Page 298

self-realisation by the individual in the essence of his conscious being; there will still remain on that foundation,
unannulled by the silence, one with the release and freedom, the infinitely proceeding self-fulfilment of Brahman,
its dynamic divine manifestation in the individual and by his presence, example and action in others and in the
universe at large,—the work which the Great Ones remain to do. Our dynamic self-fulfilment cannot be worked
out so long as we remain in the egoistic consciousness, in the mind's candle-lit darkness, in the bondage. Our
present limited consciousness can only be a field of preparation, it can consummate nothing; for all that it
manifests is marred through and through by an ego-ridden ignorance and error. The true and divine
self-fulfilment of Brahman in the manifestation is only possible on the foundation of the Brahman-consciousness
and therefore through the acceptance of life by the liberated soul, the Jivanmukta.
\par This is the integral knowledge; for we know that everywhere and in all conditions all to the eye that sees is
One, to a divine experience all is one block of the Divine. It is only the mind which for the temporary
convenience of its own thought and aspiration seeks to cut an artificial line of rigid division, a fiction of perpetual
incompatibility between one aspect and another of the eternal oneness. The liberated knower lives and acts in the
world not less than the bound soul and ignorant mind but more, doing all actions, \s{sarvak\,rt}, only with a true
knowledge and a greater conscient power. And by so doing he does not forfeit the supreme unity nor fall from
the supreme consciousness and the highest knowledge. For the Supreme, however hidden now to us, is here in
the world no less than he could be in the most utter and ineffable self-extinction, the most intolerant Nirvana.
Page 299

\par
\hn Chapter II
\par
\ht The Status of Knowledge
\par\drop The Self, the Divine, the Supreme Reality, the All, the Transcendent,—the One in all these aspects is
then the object of Yogic knowledge. Ordinary objects, the external appearances of life and matter, the
psychology of our thoughts and actions, the perception of the forces of the apparent world can be part of this
knowledge, but only in so far as it is part of the manifestation of the One. It becomes at once evident that the
knowledge for which Yoga strives must be different from what men ordinarily understand by the word. For we
mean ordinarily by knowledge an intellectual appreciation of the facts of life, mind and matter and the laws that
govern them. This is a knowledge founded upon our sense-perception and upon reasoning from our
sense-perceptions and it is undertaken partly for the pure satisfaction of the intellect, partly for practical
efficiency and the added power which knowledge gives in managing our lives and the lives of others, in utilising
for human ends the overt or secret forces of Nature and in helping or hurting, in saving and ennobling or in
oppressing and destroying our fellow-men. Yoga, indeed, is commensurate with all life and can include all these
subjects and objects. There is even a Yoga
\note{Yoga develops power, it develops it even when we do not desire or consciously aim at it; and power is
always a double-edged weapon which can be used to hurt or destroy as well as to help and save. Be it also noted
that all destruction is not evil.} which can be used for self-indulgence as well as for self-conquest, for hurting
others as well as for their salvation. But “all life” includes not only, not even mainly life as humanity now leads it.
It envisages rather and regards as its one true object a higher truly conscious existence which our half-conscious
humanity does not yet possess and can only arrive at by a self-exceeding spiritual ascension. It is this greater
consciousness and higher existence
Page 300

which is the peculiar and appropriate object of Yogic discipline.
\par This greater consciousness, this higher existence are not an enlightened or illumined mentality supported by a
greater dynamic energy or supporting a purer moral life and character. Their superiority to the ordinary human
consciousness is not in degree but in kind and essence. There is a change not merely of the surface or
instrumental manner of our being but of its very foundation and dynamic principle. Yogic knowledge seeks to
enter into a secret consciousness beyond mind which is only occultly here, concealed at the basis of all existence.
For it is that consciousness alone that truly knows and only by its possession can we possess God and rightly
know the world and its real nature and secret forces. All this world visible or sensible to us and all too in it that is
not visible is merely the phenomenal expression of something beyond the mind and the senses. The knowledge
which the senses and intellectual reasoning from the data of the senses can bring us, is not true knowledge; it is a
science of appearances. And even appearances cannot be properly known unless we know first the Reality of
which they are images. This Reality is their self and there is one self of all; when that is seized, all other things
can then be known in their truth and no longer as now only in their appearance.
\par It is evident that however much we may analyse the physical and sensible, we cannot by that means arrive
at the knowledge of the Self or of ourselves or of that which we call God. The telescope, the microscope, the
scalpel, the retort and alembic cannot go beyond the physical, although they may arrive at subtler and subtler
truths about the physical. If then we confine ourselves to what the senses and their physical aids reveal to us and
refuse from the beginning to admit any other reality or any other means of knowledge, we are obliged to
conclude that nothing is real except the physical and that there is no Self in us or in the universe, no God within
and without, no ourselves even except this aggregate of brain, nerves and body. But this we are only obliged to
conclude because we have assumed it firmly from the beginning and therefore cannot but circle round to our
original assumption.
Page 301

\par If, then, there is a Self, a Reality not obvious to the senses, it must be by other means than those of physical
Science that it is to be sought and known. The intellect is not that means. Undoubtedly there are a number of
suprasensuous truths at which the intellect is able to arrive in its own manner and which it is able to perceive and
state as intellectual conceptions. The very idea of Force for instance on which Science so much insists, is a
conception, a truth at which the intellect alone can arrive by going beyond its data; for we do not sense this
universal force but only its results, and the force itself we infer as a necessary cause of these results. So also the
intellect by following a certain line of rigorous analysis can arrive at the intellectual conception and the intellectual
conviction of the Self and this conviction can be very real, very luminous, very potent as the beginning of other
and greater things. Still, in itself intellectual analysis can only lead to an arrangement of clear conceptions,
perhaps to a right arrangement of true conceptions; but this is not the knowledge aimed at by Yoga. For it is not
in itself an effective knowledge. A man may be perfect in it and yet be precisely what he was before except in
the mere fact of the greater intellectual illumination. The change of our being at which Yoga aims, may not at all
take place.
\par It is true that intellectual deliberation and right discrimination are an important part of the Yoga of
knowledge; but their object is rather to remove a difficulty than to arrive at the final and positive result of this
path. Our ordinary intellectual notions are a stumbling-block in the way of knowledge; for they are governed by
the error of the senses and they found themselves on the notion that matter and body are the reality, that life and
force are the reality, that passion and emotion, thought and sense are the reality; and with these things we
identify ourselves, and because we identify ourselves with these things we cannot get back to the real self.
Therefore, it is necessary for the seeker of knowledge to remove this stumbling-block and to get right notions
about himself and the world; for how shall we pursue by knowledge the real self if we have no notion of what it
is and are on the contrary burdened with ideas quite opposite to the truth?
Page 302

Therefore right thought is a necessary preliminary, and once the habit of right thought is established, free from
sense-error and desire and old association and intellectual prejudgment, the understanding becomes purified and
offers no serious obstacle to the farther process of knowledge. Still, right thought only becomes effective when in
the purified understanding it is followed by other operations, by vision, by experience, by realisation.
\par What are these operations? They are not mere psychological self-analysis and self-observation. Such
analysis, such observation are, like the process of right thought, of immense value and practically indispensable.
They may even, if rightly pursued, lead to a right thought of considerable power and effectivity. Like intellectual
discrimination by the process of meditative thought they will have an effect of purification; they will lead to
self-knowledge of a certain kind and to the setting right of the disorders of the soul and the heart and even of the
disorders of the understanding. Self-knowledge of all kinds is on the straight path to the knowledge of the real
Self. The Upanishad tells us that the Self-existent has so set the doors of the soul that they turn outwards and
most men look outward into the appearances of things; only the rare soul that is ripe for a calm thought and
steady wisdom turns its eye inward, sees the Self and attains to immortality. To this turning of the eye inward
psychological self-observation and analysis is a great and effective introduction. We can look into the inward of
ourselves more easily than we can look into the inward of things external to us because there, in things outside
us, we are in the first place embarrassed by the form and secondly we have no natural previous experience of
that in them which is other than their physical substance. A purified or tranquillised mind may reflect or a
powerful concentration may discover God in the world, the Self in Nature even before it is realised in ourselves,
but this is rare and difficult.
\note{In one respect, however, it is easier, because in external things we are not so much hampered by the sense
of the limited ego as in ourselves; one obstacle to the realisation of God is therefore removed.} And it is only in
ourselves that we can observe and know the
Page 303

process of the Self in its becoming and follow the process by which it draws back into self-being. Therefore the
ancient counsel, know thyself, will always stand as the first word that directs us towards {\it the} knowledge.
Still, psychological self-knowledge is only the experience of the modes of the Self, it is not the realisation of the
Self in its pure being.
\par The status of knowledge, then, which Yoga envisages is not merely an intellectual conception or clear
discrimination of the truth, nor is it an enlightened psychological experience of the modes of our being. It is a
“realisation”, in the full sense of the word; it is the making real to ourselves and in ourselves of the Self, the
transcendent and universal Divine, and it is the subsequent impossibility of viewing the modes of being except in
the light of that Self and in their true aspect as its flux of becoming under the psychical and physical conditions of
our world-existence. This realisation consists of three successive movements, internal vision, complete internal
experience and identity.
\par This internal vision, \s{d\,r\,s\,ti}, the power so highly valued by the ancient sages, the power which made a man
a Rishi or Kavi and no longer a mere thinker, is a sort of light in the soul by which things unseen become as
evident and real to it—to the soul and not merely to the intellect—as do things seen to the physical eye. In the
physical world there are always two forms of knowledge, the direct and the indirect, \s{pratyak\,sa}, of that which
is present to the eyes, and \s{parok\,sa}, of that which is remote from and beyond our vision. When the object is
beyond our vision, we are necessarily obliged to arrive at an idea of it by inference, imagination, analogy, by
hearing the descriptions of others who have seen it or by studying pictorial or other representations of it if these
are available. By putting together all these aids we can indeed arrive at a more or less adequate idea or
suggestive image of the object, but we do not realise the thing itself; it is not yet to us the grasped reality, but only
our conceptual representation of a reality. But once we have seen it with the eyes,—for no other sense is
adequate,—we possess, we realise; it is there secure in our satisfied being, part of ourselves in knowledge.
Page 304

Precisely the same rule holds good of psychical things and of the Self. We may hear clear and luminous
teachings about the Self from philosophers or teachers or from ancient writings; we may by thought, inference,
imagination, analogy or by any other available means attempt to form a mental figure or conception of it; we may
hold firmly that conception in our mind and fix it by an entire and exclusive concentration;
\note{This is the idea of the triple operation of Jnanayoga, \s{\'srava\,na}, \s{manana}, \s{nididhy\=asana}, hearing,
thinking or mentalising and fixing in concentration.} but we have not yet realised it, we have not seen God. It is
only when after long and persistent concentration or by other means the veil of the mind is rent or swept aside,
only when a flood of light breaks over the awakened mentality, \s{jyotirmaya brahman}, and conception gives
place to a knowledge-vision in which the Self is as present, real, concrete as a physical object to the physical eye,
that we possess in knowledge; for we have seen. After that revelation, whatever fadings of the light, whatever
periods of darkness may afflict the soul, it can never irretrievably lose what it has once held. The experience is
inevitably renewed and must become more frequent till it is constant; when and how soon depends on the
devotion and persistence with which we insist on the path and besiege by our will or our love the hidden Deity.
\par This inner vision is one form of psychological experience; but the inner experience is not confined to that
seeing; vision only opens, it does not embrace. Just as the eye, though it is alone adequate to bring the first sense
of realisation, has to call in the aid of experience by the touch and other organs of sense before there is an
embracing knowledge, so the vision of the self ought to be completed by an experience of it in all our members.
Our whole being ought to demand God and not only our illumined eye of knowledge. For since each principle in
us is only a manifestation of the Self, each can get back to its reality and have the experience of it. We can have
a mental experience of the Self and seize as concrete realities all those apparently abstract things that to the
mind constitute existence—consciousness, force, delight and their manifold forms and workings: thus the
Page 305

mind is satisfied of God. We can have an emotional experience of the Self through Love and through emotional
delight, love and delight of the Self in us, of the Self in the universal and of the Self in all with whom we have
relations: thus the heart is satisfied of God. We can have an aesthetic experience of the Self in beauty, a
delight-perception and taste of the absolute reality all-beautiful in everything whether created by ourselves or
Nature in its appeal to the aesthetic mind and the senses; thus the sense is satisfied of God. We can have even
the vital, nervous experience and practically the physical sense of the Self in all life and formation and in all
workings of powers, forces, energies that operate through us or others or in the world: thus the life and the body
are satisfied of God.
\par All this knowledge and experience are primary means of arriving at and of possessing identity. It is our self
that we see and experience and therefore vision and experience are incomplete unless they culminate in identity,
unless we are able to live in all our being the supreme Vedantic knowledge, He am I. We must not only see God
and embrace Him, but become that Reality. We must become one with the Self in its transcendence of all form
and manifestation by the resolution, the sublimation, the escape from itself of ego and all its belongings into That
from which they proceed, as well as become the Self in all its manifested existences and becomings, one with it
in the infinite existence, consciousness, peace, delight by which it reveals itself in us and one with it in the action,
formation, play of self-conception with which it garbs itself in the world.
\par It is difficult for the modern mind to understand how we can do more than conceive intellectually of the Self
or of God; but it may borrow some shadow of this vision, experience and becoming from that inner awakening to
Nature which a great English poet has made a reality to the European imagination. If we read the poems in
which Wordsworth expressed his realisation of Nature, we may acquire some distant idea of what realisation is.
For, first, we see that he had the vision of something in the world which is the very Self of all things that it
contains, a conscious force and presence other than its forms, yet cause of its forms
Page 306

and manifested in them. We perceive that he had not only the vision of this and the joy and peace and
universality which its presence brings, but the very sense of it, mental, aesthetic, vital, physical; not only this
sense and vision of it in its own being but in the nearest flower and simplest man and the immobile rock; and,
finally, that he even occasionally attained to that unity, that becoming the object of his meditation, one phase of
which is powerfully and profoundly expressed in the poem “A slumber did my spirit seal,” where he describes
himself as become one in his being with earth, “rolled round in its diurnal course with rocks and stones and
trees.” Exalt this realisation to a profounder Self than physical Nature and we have the elements of the Yogic
knowledge. But all this experience is only the vestibule to that suprasensuous, supramental realisation of the
Transcendent who is beyond all His aspects, and the final summit of knowledge can only be attained by entering
into the superconscient and there merging all other experience into a supernal unity with the Ineffable. That is the
culmination of all divine knowing; that also is the source of all divine delight and divine living.
\par That status of knowledge is then the aim of this path and indeed of all paths when pursued to their end, to
which intellectual discrimination and conception and all concentration and psychological self-knowledge and all
seeking by the heart through love and by the senses through beauty and by the will through power and works and
by the soul through peace and joy are only keys, avenues, first approaches and beginnings of the ascent which
we have to use and to follow till the wide and infinite levels are attained and the divine doors swing open into the
infinite Light.
Page 307

\par
\hn Chapter III
\par
\ht The Purified Understanding
\par\drop The description of the status of knowledge to which we aspire, determines the means of knowledge
which we shall use. That status of knowledge may be summed up as a supramental realisation which is prepared
by mental representations through various mental principles in us and once attained again reflects itself more
perfectly in all the members of the being. It is a re-seeing and therefore a remoulding of our whole existence in
the light of the Divine and One and Eternal free from subjection to the appearances of things and the
externalities of our superficial being.
\par Such a passage from the human to the divine, from the divided and discordant to the One, from the
phenomenon to the eternal Truth, such an entire rebirth or new birth of the soul must necessarily involve two
stages, one of preparation in which the soul and its instruments must become fit and another of actual illumination
and realisation in the prepared soul through its fit instruments. There is indeed no rigid line of demarcation in
sequence of Time between these two stages; rather they are necessary to each other and continue
simultaneously. For in proportion as the soul becomes fit it increases in illumination and rises to higher and higher,
completer and completer realisations, and in proportion as these illuminations and these realisations increase,
becomes fit and its instruments more adequate to their task: there are soul-seasons of unillumined preparation
and soul-seasons of illumined growth and culminating soul-moments more or less prolonged of illumined
possession, moments that are transient like the flash of the lightning, yet change the whole spiritual future,
moments also that extend over many human hours, days, weeks in a constant light or blaze of the Sun of Truth.
And through all these the soul once turned Godwards grows
Page 308

towards the permanence and perfection of its new birth and real existence.
\par The first necessity of preparation is the purifying of all the members of our being; especially, for the path of
knowledge, the purification of the understanding, the key that shall open the door of Truth; and a purified
understanding is hardly possible without the purification of the other members. An unpurified heart, an unpurified
sense, an unpurified life confuse the understanding, disturb its data, distort its conclusions, darken its seeing,
misapply its knowledge; an unpurified physical system clogs or chokes up its action. There must be an integral
purity. Here also there is an interdependence; for the purification of each member of our being profits by the
clarifying of every other, the progressive tranquillisation of the emotional heart helping for instance the
purification of the understanding while equally a purified understanding imposes calm and light on the turbid and
darkened workings of the yet impure emotions. It may even be said that while each member of our being has its
own proper principles of purification, yet it is the purified understanding that in man is the most potent cleanser of
his turbid and disordered being and most sovereignly imposes their right working on his other members.
Knowledge, says the Gita, is the sovereign purity; light is the source of all clearness and harmony even as the
darkness of ignorance is the cause of all our stumblings. Love, for example, is the purifier of the heart and by
reducing all our emotions into terms of divine love the heart is perfected and fulfilled; yet love itself needs to be
clarified by divine knowledge. The heart's love of God may be blind, narrow and ignorant and lead to fanaticism
and obscurantism; it may, even when otherwise pure, limit our perfection by refusing to see Him except in a
limited personality and by recoiling from the true and infinite vision. The heart's love of man may equally lead to
distortions and exaggerations in feeling, action and knowledge which have to be corrected and prevented by the
purification of the understanding.
\par We must, however, consider deeply and clearly what we mean by the understanding and by its purification.
We use the
Page 309

word as the nearest equivalent we can get in the English tongue to the Sanskrit philosophical term \s{buddhi};
therefore we exclude from it the action of the sense mind which merely consists of the recording of perceptions
of all kinds without distinction whether they be right or wrong, true or mere illusory phenomena, penetrating or
superficial. We exclude that mass of confused conception which is merely a rendering of these perceptions and
is equally void of the higher principle of judgment and discrimination. Nor can we include that constant leaping
current of habitual thought which does duty for understanding in the mind of the average unthinking man, but is
only a constant repetition of habitual associations, desires, prejudices, prejudgments, received or inherited
preferences, even though it may constantly enrich itself by a fresh stock of concepts streaming in from the
environment and admitted without the challenge of the sovereign discriminating reason. Undoubtedly this is a sort
of understanding which has been very useful in the development of man from the animal; but it is only one
remove above the animal mind; it is a half-animal reason subservient to habit, to desire and the senses and is of
no avail in the search whether for scientific or philosophical or spiritual knowledge. We have to go beyond it; its
purification can only be effected either by dismissing or silencing it altogether or by transmuting it into the true
understanding.
\par By the understanding we mean that which at once perceives, judges and discriminates, the true reason of
the human being not subservient to the senses, to desire or to the blind force of habit, but working in its own right
for mastery, for knowledge. Certainly, the reason of man as he is at present does not even at its best act entirely
in this free and sovereign fashion; but so far as it fails, it fails because it is still mixed with the lower half-animal
action, because it is impure and constantly hampered and pulled down from its characteristic action. In its purity
it should not be involved in these lower movements, but stand back from the object, and observe disinterestedly,
put it in its right place in the whole by force of comparison, contrast, analogy, reason from its rightly observed
data by deduction, induction, inference and
Page 310

holding all its gains in memory and supplementing them by a chastened and rightly-guided imagination view all in
the light of a trained and disciplined judgment. Such is the pure intellectual understanding of which disinterested
observation, judgment and reasoning are the law and characterising action.
\par But the term \s{buddhi} is also used in another and profounder sense. The intellectual understanding is only
the lower \s{buddhi}; there is another and a higher \s{buddhi} which is not intelligence but vision, is not
understanding but rather an over-standing
\note{The Divine Being is described as the \s{adhyak\,sa}, he who seated over all in the supreme ether over-sees
things, views and controls them from above.} in knowledge, and does not seek knowledge and attain it in
subjection to the data it observes but possesses already the truth and brings it out in the terms of a revelatory and
intuitional thought. The nearest the human mind usually gets to this truth-conscious knowledge is that imperfect
action of illumined finding which occurs when there is a great stress of thought and the intellect electrified by
constant discharges from behind the veil and yielding to a higher enthusiasm admits a considerable instreaming
from the intuitive and inspired faculty of knowledge. For there is an intuitive mind in man which serves as a
recipient and channel for these instreamings from a supramental faculty. But the action of intuition and inspiration
in us is imperfect in kind as well as intermittent in action; ordinarily, it comes in response to a claim from the
labouring and struggling heart or intellect and, even before its givings enter the conscious mind, they are already
affected by the thought or aspiration which went up to meet them, are no longer pure but altered to the needs of
the heart or intellect; and after they enter the conscious mind, they are immediately seized upon by the
intellectual understanding and dissipated or broken up so as to fit in with our imperfect intellectual knowledge, or
by the heart and remoulded to suit our blind or half-blind emotional longings and preferences, or even by the
lower cravings and distorted to the vehement uses of our hungers and passions.
\par If this higher \sforced{buddhi} could act pure of the interference of
Page 311

these lower members, it would give pure forms of the truth; observation would be dominated or replaced by a
vision which could see without subservient dependence on the testimony of the sense-mind and senses;
imagination would give place to the self-assured inspiration of the truth, reasoning to the spontaneous
discernment of relations and conclusion from reasoning to an intuition containing in itself those relations and not
building laboriously upon them, judgment to a thought-vision in whose light the truth would stand revealed without
the mask which it now wears and which our intellectual judgment has to penetrate; while memory too would take
upon itself that larger sense given to it in Greek thought and be no longer a paltry selection from the store gained
by the individual in his present life, but rather the all-recording knowledge which secretly holds and constantly
gives from itself everything that we now seem painfully to \NH acquire but really in this sense remember, a
knowledge which includes the future
\note{In this sense the power of prophecy has been aptly called a memory of the future.} no less than the past.
Certainly, we are intended to grow in our receptivity to this higher faculty of truth-conscious knowledge, but its
full and unveiled use is as yet the privilege of the gods and beyond our present human stature.
\par We see then what we mean precisely by the understanding and by that higher faculty which we may call for
the sake of convenience the ideal faculty and which stands to the developed intellect much in the same relation
as that intellect stands to the half-animal reason of the undeveloped man. It becomes evident also what is the
nature of the purification which is necessary before the understanding can fulfil rightly its part in the attainment
of right knowledge. All impurity is a confusion of working, a departure from the \s{dharma}, the just and
inherently right action of things which in that right action are pure and helpful to our perfection and this departure
is usually the result of an ignorant confusion
\note{\s{sa\.nkara}.} of dharmas in which the function lends itself to the demand of other tendencies than those
which are properly its own.
Page 312

\par The first cause of impurity in the understanding is the intermiscence of desire in the thinking functions, and
desire itself is an impurity of the Will involved in the vital and emotional parts of our being. When the vital and
emotional desires interfere with the pure will-to-know, the thought-function becomes subservient to them,
pursues ends other than those proper to itself and its perceptions are clogged and deranged. The understanding
must lift itself beyond the siege of desire and emotion and, in order that it may have perfect immunity, it must get
the vital parts and the emotions themselves purified. The will to enjoy is proper to the vital being but not the
choice or the reaching after the enjoyment which must be determined and acquired by higher functions; therefore
the vital being must be trained to accept whatever gain or enjoyment comes to it in the right functioning of the life
in obedience to the working of the divine Will and to rid itself of craving and attachment. Similarly the heart must
be freed from subjection to the cravings of the life-principle and the senses and thus rid itself of the false
emotions of fear, wrath, hatred, lust, etc. which constitute the chief impurity of the heart. The will to love is
proper to the heart, but here also the choice and reaching after love have to be foregone or tranquillised and the
heart taught to love with depth and intensity indeed, but with a calm depth and a settled and equal, not a troubled
and disordered intensity. The tranquillisation and mastery
\note{\s{\'sama} and \s{dama}.} of these members is a first condition for the immunity of the understanding from
error, ignorance and perversion. This purification spells an entire equality of the nervous being and the heart;
equality, therefore, even as it was the first word of the path of works, so also is the first word of the path of
knowledge.
\par The second cause of impurity in the understanding is the illusion of the senses and the intermiscence of the
sense-mind in the thinking functions. No knowledge can be true knowledge which subjects itself to the senses or
uses them otherwise than as first indices whose data have constantly to be corrected and over-passed. The
beginning of Science is the examination of the truths
Page 313

of the world-force that underlie its apparent workings such as our senses represent them to be; the beginning of
philosophy is the examination of the principles of things which the senses mistranslate to us; the beginning of
spiritual knowledge is the refusal to accept the limitations of the sense-life or to take the visible and sensible as
anything more than phenomenon of the Reality.
\par Equally must the sense-mind be stilled and taught to leave the function of thought to the mind that judges and
understands. When the understanding in us stands back from the action of the sense-mind and repels its
intermiscence, the latter detaches itself from the understanding and can be watched in its separate action. It then
reveals itself as a constantly swirling and eddying undercurrent of habitual concepts, associations, perceptions,
desires without any real sequence, order or principle of light. It is a constant repetition in a circle unintelligent and
unfruitful. Ordinarily the human understanding accepts this undercurrent and tries to reduce it to a partial order
and sequence; but by so doing it becomes itself subject to it and partakes of that disorder, restlessness,
unintelligent subjection to habit and blind purposeless repetition which makes the ordinary human reason a
misleading, limited and even frivolous and futile instrument. There is nothing to be done with this fickle, restless,
violent and disturbing factor but to get rid of it whether by detaching it and then reducing it to stillness or by
giving a concentration and singleness to the thought by which it will of itself reject this alien and confusing
element.
\par A third cause of impurity has its source in the understanding itself and consists in an improper action of the
will to know. That will is proper to the understanding, but here again choice and unequal reaching after
knowledge clog and distort. They lead to a partiality and attachment which makes the intellect cling to certain
ideas and opinions with a more or less obstinate will to ignore the truth in other ideas and opinions, cling to certain
fragments of a truth and shy against the admission of other parts which are yet necessary to its fullness, cling to
certain predilections of knowledge and repel all knowledge that does not
Page 314

agree with the personal temperament of thought which has been acquired by the past of the thinker. The remedy
lies in a perfect equality of the mind, in the cultivation of an entire intellectual rectitude and in the perfection of
mental disinterestedness. The purified understanding as it will not lend itself to any desire or craving, so will not
lend itself either to any predilection or distaste for any particular idea or truth, and will refuse to be attached even
to those ideas of which it is the most certain or to lay on them such an undue stress as is likely to disturb the
balance of truth and depreciate the values of other elements of a complete and perfect knowledge.
\par An understanding thus purified would be a perfectly flexible, entire and faultless instrument of intellectual
thought and being free from the inferior sources of obstruction and distortion would be capable of as true and
complete a perception of the truths of the Self and the universe as the intellect can attain. But for real knowledge
something more is necessary, since real knowledge is by our very definition of it supra-intellectual. In order that
the understanding may not interfere with our attainment to real knowledge, we have to reach to that something
more and cultivate a power exceedingly difficult for the active intellectual thinker and distasteful to his
proclivities, the power of intellectual passivity. The object served is double and therefore two different kinds of
passivity have to be acquired.
\par In the first place we have seen that intellectual thought is in itself inadequate and is not the highest thinking;
the highest is that which comes through the intuitive mind and from the supramental faculty. So long as we are
dominated by the intellectual habit and by the lower workings, the intuitive mind can only send its messages to us
subconsciously and subject to a distortion more or less entire before it reaches the conscious mind; or if it works
consciously, then only with an inadequate rarity and a great imperfection in its functioning. In order to strengthen
the higher knowledge-faculty in us we have to effect the same separation between the intuitive and intellectual
elements of our thought as we have already effected between the understanding and the sense-mind; and this is
no easy task, for
Page 315

not only do our intuitions come to us incrusted in the intellectual action, but there are a great number of mental
workings which masquerade and ape the appearances of the higher faculty. The remedy is to train first the
intellect to recognise the true intuition, to distinguish it from the false and then to accustom it, when it arrives at
an intellectual perception or conclusion, to attach no final value to it, but rather look upward, refer all to the divine
principle and wait in as complete a silence as it can command for the light from above. In this way it is possible
to transmute a great part of our intellectual thinking into the luminous truth-conscious vision,—the ideal would be
a complete transition,—or at least to increase greatly the frequency, purity and conscious force of the ideal
knowledge working behind the intellect. The latter must learn to be subject and passive to the ideal faculty.
\par But for the knowledge of the Self it is necessary to have the power of a complete intellectual passivity, the
power of dismissing all thought, the power of the mind to think not at all which the Gita in one passage enjoins.
This is a hard saying for the occidental mind to which thought is the highest thing and which will be apt to
mistake the power of the mind not to think, its complete silence for the incapacity of thought. But this power of
silence is a capacity and not an incapacity, a power and not a weakness. It is a profound and pregnant stillness.
Only when the mind is thus entirely still, like clear, motionless and level water, in a perfect purity and peace of
the whole being and the soul transcends thought, can the Self which exceeds and originates all activities and
becomings, the Silence from which all words are born, the Absolute of which all relativities are partial reflections
manifest itself in the pure essence of our being. In a complete silence only is the Silence heard; in a pure peace
only is its Being revealed. Therefore to us the name of That is the Silence and the Peace.
Page 316

\par
\hn Chapter IV
\par
\ht Concentration
\par\drop Along with purity and as a help to bring it about, concentration. Purity and concentration are indeed two
aspects, feminine and masculine, passive and active, of the same status of being; purity is the condition in which
concentration becomes entire, rightly effective, omnipotent; by concentration purity does its works and without it
would only lead to a state of peaceful quiescence and eternal repose. Their opposites are also closely connected;
for we have seen that impurity is a confusion of dharmas, a lax, mixed and mutually entangled action of the
different parts of the being; and this confusion proceeds from an absence of right concentration of its knowledge
on its energies in the embodied Soul. The fault of our nature is first an inert subjection to the impacts of
things
\note{\s{b\=ahyaspar\'sa}.} as they come in upon the mind pell-mell without order or control and then a haphazard
imperfect concentration managed fitfully, irregularly with a more or less chance emphasis on this or on that
object according as they happen to interest, not the higher soul or the judging and discerning intellect, but the
restless, leaping, fickle, easily tired, easily distracted lower mind which is the chief enemy of our progress. In
such a condition purity, the right working of the functions, the clear, unstained and luminous order of the being is
an impossibility; the various workings, given over to the chances of the environment and external influences, must
necessarily run into each other and clog, divert, distract, pervert. Equally, without purity the complete, equal,
flexible concentration of the being in right thought, right will, right feeling or secure status of spiritual experience
is not possible. Therefore the two must proceed together, each helping the victory of the other, until we arrive at
that eternal calm from which may proceed some
Page 317

partial image in the human being of the eternal, omnipotent and omniscient activity.
\par But in the path of knowledge as it is practised in India concentration is used in a special and more limited
sense. It means that removal of the thought from all distracting activities of the mind and that concentration of it
on the idea of the One by which the soul rises out of the phenomenal into the one Reality. It is by the thought that
we dissipate ourselves in the phenomenal; it is by the gathering back of the thought into itself that we must draw
ourselves back into the real. Concentration has three powers by which this aim can be effected. By
concentration on anything whatsoever we are able to know that thing, to make it deliver up its concealed secrets;
we must use this power to know not things, but the one Thing-in-itself. By concentration again the whole will can
be gathered up for the acquisition of that which is still ungrasped, still beyond us; this power, if it is sufficiently
trained, sufficiently single-minded, sufficiently sincere, sure of itself, faithful to itself alone, absolute in faith, we
can use for the acquisition of any object whatsoever; but we ought to use it not for the acquisition of the many
objects which the world offers to us, but to grasp spiritually that one object worthy of pursuit which is also the
one subject worthy of knowledge. By concentration of our whole being on one status of itself, we can become
whatever we choose; we can become, for instance, even if we were before a mass of weaknesses and fears, a
mass instead of strength and courage, or we can become all a great purity, holiness and peace or a single
universal soul of Love; but we ought, it is said, to use this power to become not even these things, high as they
may be in comparison with what we now are, but rather to become that which is above all things and free from
all action and attributes, the pure and absolute Being. All else, all other concentration can only be valuable for
preparation, for previous steps, for a gradual training of the dissolute and self-dissipating thought, will and being
towards their grand and unique object.
\par This use of concentration implies like every other a previous purification; it implies also in the end a
renunciation, a cessation
Page 318

and lastly an ascent into the absolute and transcendent state of Samadhi from which if it culminates, if it endures,
there is, except perhaps for one soul out of many thousands, no return. For by that we go to the “supreme state
of the Eternal whence souls revert not” into the cyclic action of Nature;
\note{\s{yato naiva nivartante tad dh\=ama parama\.m mama.}} and it is into this Samadhi that the Yogin who aims
at release from the world seeks to pass away at the time of leaving his body. We see this succession in the
discipline of the Rajayoga. For first the Rajayogin must arrive at a certain moral and spiritual purity; he must get
rid of the lower or downward activities of his mind, but afterwards he must stop all its activities and concentrate
himself in the one idea that leads from activity to the quiescence of status. The Rajayogic concentration has
several stages, that in which the object is seized, that in which it is held, that in which the mind is lost in the status
which the object represents or to which the concentration leads, and only the last is termed Samadhi in the
Rajayoga although the word is capable, as in the Gita, of a much wider sense. But in the Rajayogic Samadhi
there are different grades of status,—that in which the mind, though lost to outward objects, still muses, thinks,
perceives in the world of thought, that in which the mind is still capable of primary thought-formations and that in
which, all out-darting of the mind even within itself having ceased, the soul rises beyond thought into the silence
of the Incommunicable and Ineffable. In all Yoga there are indeed many preparatory objects of
thought-concentration, forms, verbal formulas of thought, significant names, all of which are
supports
\note{\s{avalambana}.} to the mind in this movement, all of which have to be used and transcended; the highest
support according to the Upanishads is the mystic syllable AUM, whose three letters represent the Brahman or
Supreme Self in its three degrees of status, the Waking Soul, the Dream Soul and the Sleep Soul, and the whole
potent sound rises towards that which is beyond status as beyond activity.
\lnote{ Mandukya Upanishad.}
Page 319

For of all Yoga of knowledge the final goal is the Transcendent.
\par We have, however, conceived as the aim of an integral Yoga something more complex and less
exclusive—less exclusively positive of the highest condition of the soul, less exclusively negative of its divine
radiations. We must aim indeed at the Highest, the Source of all, the Transcendent but not to the exclusion of
that which it transcends, rather as the source of an established experience and supreme state of the soul which
shall transform all other states and remould our consciousness of the world into the form of its secret Truth. We
do not seek to excise from our being all consciousness of the universe, but to realise God, Truth and Self in the
universe as well as transcendent of it. We shall seek therefore not only the Ineffable, but also His manifestation
as infinite being, consciousness and bliss embracing the universe and at play in it. For that triune infinity is His
supreme manifestation and that we shall aspire to know, to share in and to become; and since we seek to realise
this Trinity not only in itself but in its cosmic play, we shall aspire also to knowledge of and participation in the
universal divine Truth, Knowledge, Will, Love which are His secondary manifestation, His divine becoming. With
this too we shall aspire to identify ourselves, towards this too we shall strive to rise and, when the period of effort
is passed, allow it by our renunciation of all egoism to draw us up into itself in our being and to descend into us
and embrace us in all our becoming. This not only as a means of approach and passage to His supreme
transcendence, but as the condition, even when we possess and are possessed by the Transcendent, of a divine
life in the manifestation of the cosmos.
\par In order that we may do this, the terms concentration and Samadhi must assume for us a richer and
profound meaning. All our concentration is merely an image of the divine Tapas by which the Self dwells
gathered in itself, by which it manifests within itself, by which it maintains and possesses its manifestation, by
which it draws back from all manifestation into its supreme oneness. Being dwelling in consciousness upon itself
for bliss, this is the divine Tapas; and a Knowledge-Will dwelling
Page 320

in force of consciousness on itself and its manifestations is the essence of the divine concentration, the Yoga of
the Lord of Yoga. Given the self-differentiation of the Divine in which we dwell, concentration is the means by
which the individual soul identifies itself with and enters into any form, state or psychological self-manifestation
(\s{bh\=ava}) of the Self. To use this means for unification with the Divine is the condition for the attainment of
divine knowledge and the principle of all Yoga of knowledge.
\par This concentration proceeds by the Idea, using thought, form and name as keys which yield up to the
concentrating mind the Truth that lies concealed behind all thought, form and name; for it is through the Idea that
the mental being rises beyond all expression to that which is expressed, to that of which the Idea itself is only the
instrument. By concentration upon the Idea the mental existence which at present we are breaks open the
barrier of our mentality and arrives at the state of consciousness, the state of being, the state of power of
conscious-being and bliss of conscious-being to which the Idea corresponds and of which it is the symbol,
movement and rhythm. Concentration by the Idea is, then, only a means, a key to open to us the superconscient
planes of our existence; a certain self-gathered state of our whole existence lifted into that superconscient truth,
unity and infinity of self-aware, self-blissful existence is the aim and culmination; and that is the meaning we shall
give to the term Samadhi. Not merely a state withdrawn from all consciousness of the outward, withdrawn even
from all consciousness of the inward into that which exists beyond both whether as seed of both or transcendent
even of their seed-state; but a settled existence in the One and Infinite, united and identified with it, and this
status to remain whether we abide in the waking condition in which we are conscious of the forms of things or
we withdraw into the inward activity which dwells in the play of the principles of things, the play of their names
and typal forms or we soar to the condition of static inwardness where we arrive at the principles themselves
and at the principle of all principles, the seed of name and form.
\note{The Waking, Dream and Sleep states of the soul.}
Page 321

For the soul that has arrived at the essential Samadhi and is settled in it (\s{sam\=adhistha}) in the sense the Gita
attaches to the word, has that which is fundamental to all experience and cannot fall from it by any experience
however distracting to one who has not yet ascended the summit. It can embrace all in the scope of its being
without being bound by any or deluded or limited.
\par When we arrive at this state, all our being and consciousness being concentrated, the necessity of
concentration in the Idea ceases. For there in that supramental state the whole position of things is reversed. The
mind is a thing that dwells in diffusion, in succession; it can only concentrate on one thing at a time and when not
concentrated runs from one thing to another very much at random. Therefore it has to concentrate on a single
idea, a single subject of meditation, a single object of contemplation, a single object of will in order to possess or
master it, and this it must do to at least the temporary exclusion of all others. But that which is beyond the mind
and into which we seek to rise is superior to the running process of the thought, superior to the division of ideas.
The Divine is centred in itself and when it throws out ideas and activities does not divide itself or imprison itself in
them, but holds them and their movement in its infinity; undivided, its whole self is behind each Idea and each
movement and at the same time behind all of them together. Held by it, each spontaneously works itself out, not
through a separate act of will, but by the general force of consciousness behind it; if to us there seems to be a
concentration of divine Will and Knowledge in each, it is a multiple and equal and not an exclusive concentration,
and the reality of it is rather a free and spontaneous working in a self-gathered unity and infinity. The soul which
has risen to the divine Samadhi participates in the measure of its attainment in this reversed condition of
things,—the true condition, for that which is the reverse of our mentality is the truth. It is for this reason that, as
is said in the ancient books, the man who has arrived at Self-possession attains spontaneously without the need of
concentration in thought and effort the knowledge or the result which the Idea or the Will in him moves out to
embrace.
Page 322

\par To arrive then at this settled divine status must be the object of our concentration. The first step in
concentration must be always to accustom the discursive mind to a settled unwavering pursuit of a single course
of connected thought on a single subject and this it must do undistracted by all lures and alien calls on its
attention. Such concentration is common enough in our ordinary life, but it becomes more difficult when we have
to do it inwardly without any outward object or action on which to keep the mind; yet this inward concentration is
what the seeker of knowledge must effect.
\note{In the elementary stages of internal debate and judgment, \s{vitarka} and \s{vic\=ara}, for the correction of
false ideas and arrival at the intellectual truth.} Nor must it be merely the consecutive thought of the intellectual
thinker, whose only object is to conceive and intellectually link together his conceptions. It is not, except perhaps
at first, a process of reasoning that is wanted so much as a dwelling so far as possible on the fruitful essence of
the idea which by the insistence of the soul's will upon it must yield up all the facets of its truth. Thus if it be the
divine Love that is the subject of concentration, it is on the essence of the idea of God as Love that the mind
should concentrate in such a way that the various manifestation of the divine Love should arise luminously, not
only to the thought, but in the heart and being and vision of the sadhaka. The thought may come first and the
experience afterwards, but equally the experience may come first and the knowledge arise out of the experience.
Afterwards the thing attained has to be dwelt on and more and more held till it becomes a constant experience
and finally the dharma or law of the being.
\par This is the process of concentrated meditation; but a more strenuous method is the fixing of the whole mind
in concentration on the essence of the idea only, so as to reach not the thought-knowledge or the psychological
experience of the subject, but the very essence of the thing behind the idea. In this process thought ceases and
passes into the absorbed or ecstatic contemplation of the object or by a merging into it in an inner Samadhi. If
this be the process followed, then subsequently the
Page 323

state into which we rise must still be called down to take possession of the lower being, to shed its light, power
and bliss on our ordinary consciousness. For otherwise we may possess it, as many do, in the elevated condition
or in the inward Samadhi, but we shall lose our hold of it when we awake or descend into the contacts of the
world; and this truncated possession is not the aim of an integral Yoga.
\par A third process is neither at first to concentrate in a strenuous meditation on the one subject nor in a
strenuous contemplation of the one object of thought-vision, but first to still the mind altogether. This may be done
by various ways; one is to stand back from the mental action altogether not participating in but simply watching it
until, tired of its unsanctioned leaping and running, it falls into an increasing and finally an absolute quiet. Another
is to reject the thought-suggestions, to cast them away from the mind whenever they come and firmly hold to the
peace of the being which really and always exists behind the trouble and riot of the mind. When this secret peace
is unveiled, a great calm settles on the being and there comes usually with it the perception and experience of the
all-pervading silent Brahman, everything else at first seeming to be mere form and eidolon. On the basis of this
calm everything else may be built up in the knowledge and experience no longer of the external phenomena of
things but of the deeper truth of the divine manifestation.
\par Ordinarily, once this state is obtained, strenuous concentration will be found no longer necessary. A free
concentration of will
\note{This subject will be dealt with more in detail when we come to the Yoga of self-perfection.} using thought
merely for suggestion and the giving of light to the lower members will take its place. This Will will then insist on
the physical being, the vital existence, the heart and the mind remoulding themselves in the forms of the Divine
which reveal themselves out of the silent Brahman. By swifter or slower degrees according to the previous
preparation and purification of the members, they will be obliged with more or less struggle to obey the law of the
will and its thought-suggestion, so that
Page 324

eventually the knowledge of the Divine takes possession of our consciousness on all its planes and the image of
the Divine is formed in our human existence even as it was done by the old Vedic Sadhakas. For the integral
Yoga this is the most direct and powerful discipline.
Page 325

\par
\hn Chapter V
\par
\ht Renunciation
\par\drop If discipline of all the members of our being by purification and concentration may be described as the
right arm of the body of Yoga, renunciation is its left arm. By discipline or positive practice we confirm in
ourselves the truth of things, truth of being, truth of knowledge, truth of love, truth of works and replace with
these the falsehoods that have overgrown and perverted our nature; by renunciation we seize upon the
falsehoods, pluck up their roots and cast them out of our way so that they shall no longer hamper by their
persistence, their resistance or their recurrence the happy and harmonious growth of our divine living.
Renunciation is an indispensable instrument of our perfection.
\par How far shall this renunciation go? what shall be its nature? and in what way shall it be applied? There is an
established tradition long favoured by great religious teachings and by men of profound spiritual experience that
renunciation must not only be complete as a discipline but definite and final as an end and that it shall fall nothing
short of the renunciation of life itself and of our mundane existence. Many causes have contributed to the growth
of this pure, lofty and august tradition. There is first the profounder cause of the radical opposition between the
sullied and imperfect nature of life in the world as it now is in the present stage of our human evolution and the
nature of spiritual living; and this opposition has led to the entire rejection of world-existence as a lie, an insanity
of the soul, a troubled and unhappy dream or at best a flawed, specious and almost worthless good or to its
characterisation as a kingdom of the world, the flesh and the devil, and therefore for the divinely led and divinely
attracted soul only a place of ordeal and preparation or at best a play of the All-existence, a game of
cross-purposes which He tires of and abandons. A second cause is the soul's
Page 326

hunger for personal salvation, for escape into some farther or farthest height of unalloyed bliss and peace
untroubled by the labour and the struggle; or else it is its unwillingness to return from the ecstasy of the divine
embrace into the lower field of work and service. But there are other slighter causes incidental to spiritual
experience,—strong feeling and practical proof of the great difficulty, which we willingly exaggerate into an
impossibility, of combining the life of works and action with spiritual peace and the life of realisation; or else the
joy which the mind comes to take in the mere act and state of renunciation,—as it comes indeed to take joy in
anything that it has attained or to which it has inured itself,—and the sense of peace and deliverance which is
gained by indifference to the world and to the objects of man's desire. Lowest causes of all are the weakness
that shrinks from the struggle, the disgust and disappointment of the soul baffled by the great cosmic labour, the
selfishness that cares not what becomes of those left behind us so long as we personally can be free from the
monstrous ever-circling wheel of death and rebirth, the indifference to the cry that rises up from a labouring
humanity.
\par For the sadhaka of an integral Yoga none of these reasons are valid. With weakness and selfishness,
however spiritual in their guise or trend, he can have no dealings; a divine strength and courage and a divine
compassion and helpfulness are the very stuff of that which he would be, they are that very nature of the Divine
which he would take upon himself as a robe of spiritual light and beauty. The revolvings of the great wheel bring
to him no sense of terror or giddiness; he rises above it in his soul and knows from above their divine law and
their divine purpose. The difficulty of harmonising the divine life with human living, of being in God and yet living
in man is the very difficulty that he is set here to solve and not to shun. He has learned that the joy, the peace
and the deliverance are an imperfect crown and no real possession if they do not form a state secure in itself,
inalienable to the soul, not dependent on aloofness and inaction but firm in the storm and the race and the battle,
unsullied whether by the joy of the world or by its suffering. The ecstasy of the divine
Page 327

embrace will not abandon him because he obeys the impulse of divine love for God in humanity; or if it seems to
draw back from him for a while, he knows by experience that it is to try and test him still farther so that some
imperfection in his own way of meeting it may fall away from him. Personal salvation he does not seek except as
a necessity for the human fulfilment and because he who is himself in bonds cannot easily free others,—though
to God nothing is impossible; for a heaven of personal joys he has no hankerings even as a hell of personal
sufferings has for him no terrors. If there is an opposition between the spiritual life and that of the world, it is that
gulf which he is here to bridge, that opposition which he is here to change into a harmony. If the world is ruled by
the flesh and the devil, all the more reason that the children of Immortality should be here to conquer it for God
and the Spirit. If life is an insanity, then there are so many million souls to whom there must be brought the light
of divine reason; if a dream, yet is it real within itself to so many dreamers who must be brought either to dream
nobler dreams or to awaken; or if a lie, then the truth has to be given to the deluded. Nor, if it be said that only by
the luminous example of escape from the world can we help the world, shall we accept that dogma, since the
contrary example of great Avataras is there to show that not only by rejecting the life of the world as it is can we
help, but also and more by accepting and uplifting it. And if it is a play of the All-Existence, then we may well
consent to play out our part in it with grace and courage, well take delight in the game along with our divine
Playmate.
\par But, most of all, the view we have taken of the world forbids the renunciation of world-existence so long as
we can be anything to God and man in their working-out of its purposes. We regard the world not as an invention
of the devil or a self-delusion of the soul, but as a manifestation of the Divine, although as yet a partial because a
progressive and evolutionary manifestation. Therefore for us renunciation of life cannot be the goal of life nor
rejection of the world the object for which the world was created. We seek to realise our unity with God, but for
us that realisation involves a complete and absolute recognition
Page 328

of our unity with man and we cannot cut the two asunder. To use Christian language, the Son of God is also the
Son of Man and both elements are necessary to the complete Christhood; or to use an Indian form of thought,
the divine Narayana of whom the universe is only one ray is revealed and fulfilled in man; the complete man is
Nara-Narayana and in that completeness he symbolises the supreme mystery of existence.
\par Therefore renunciation must be for us merely an instrument and not an object; nor can it be the only or the
chief instrument since our object is the fulfilment of the Divine in the human being, a positive aim which cannot
be reached by negative means. The negative means can only be for the removal of that which stands in the way
of the positive fulfilment. It must be a renunciation, a complete renunciation of all that is other than and opposed
to the divine self-fulfilment and a progressive renunciation of all that is a lesser or only a partial achievement. We
shall have no attachment to our life in the world; if that attachment exists, we must renounce it and renounce
utterly; but neither shall we have any attachment to the escape from the world, to salvation, to the great
self-annihilation; if that attachment exists, that also we must renounce and renounce it utterly.
\par Again our renunciation must obviously be an inward renunciation; especially and above all, a renunciation of
attachment and the craving of desire in the senses and the heart, of self-will in the thought and action and of
egoism in the centre of the consciousness. For these things are the three knots by which we are bound to our
lower nature and if we can renounce these utterly, there is nothing else that can bind us. Therefore attachment
and desire must be utterly cast out; there is nothing in the world to which we must be attached, not wealth nor
poverty, nor joy nor suffering, nor life nor death, nor greatness nor littleness, nor vice nor virtue, nor friend, nor
wife, nor children, nor country, nor our work and mission, nor heaven nor earth, nor all that is within them or
beyond them. And this does not mean that there is nothing at all that we shall love, nothing in which we shall take
delight; for attachment is egoism in love and not love
Page 329

itself, desire is limitation and insecurity in a hunger for pleasure and satisfaction and not the seeking after the
divine delight in things. A universal love we must have, calm and yet eternally intense beyond the brief
vehemence of the most violent passion; a delight in things rooted in a delight in God that does not adhere to their
forms but to that which they conceal in themselves and that embraces the universe without being caught in its
meshes.
\note{\s{Nirlipta}. The divine Ananda in things is \s{ni\,sk\=ama} and \s{nirlipta}, free from desire and therefore not
attached.}
\par Self-will in thought and action has, we have already seen, to be quite renounced if we would be perfect in
the way of divine works; it has equally to be renounced if we are to be perfect in divine knowledge. This self-will
means an egoism in the mind which attaches itself to its preferences, its habits, its past or present formations of
thought and view and will because it regards them as itself or its own, weaves around them the delicate threads
of “I-ness” and “my-ness” and lives in them like a spider in its web. It hates to be disturbed, as a spider hates
attack on its web, and feels foreign and unhappy if transplanted to fresh view-points and formations as a spider
feels foreign in another web than its own. This attachment must be entirely excised from the mind. Not only must
we give up the ordinary attitude to the world and life to which the unawakened mind clings as its natural element;
but we must not remain bound in any mental construction of our own or in any intellectual thought-system or
arrangement of religious dogmas or logical conclusions; we must not only cut asunder the snare of the mind and
the senses, but flee also beyond the snare of the thinker, the snare of the theologian and the church-builder, the
meshes of the Word and the bondage of the Idea. All these are within us waiting to wall in the spirit with forms;
but we must always go beyond, always renounce the lesser for the greater, the finite for the Infinite; we must be
prepared to proceed from illumination to illumination, from experience to experience, from soul-state to soul-state
so as to reach the utmost transcendence of the Divine and its utmost universality. Nor must we attach ourselves
even
Page 330

to the truths we hold most securely, for they are but forms and expressions of the Ineffable who refuses to limit
himself to any form or expression; always we must keep ourselves open to the higher Word from above that
does not confine itself to its own sense and the light of the Thought that carries in it its own opposites.
\par But the centre of all resistance is egoism and this we must pursue into every covert and disguise and drag it
out and slay it; for its disguises are endless and it will cling to every shred of possible self-concealment. Altruism
and indifference are often its most effective disguises; so draped, it will riot boldly in the very face of the divine
spies who are missioned to hunt it out. Here the formula of the supreme knowledge comes to our help; we have
nothing to do in our essential standpoint with these distinctions, for there is no I nor thou, but only one divine Self
equal in all embodiments, equal in the individual and the group, and to realise that, to express that, to serve that, to
fulfil that is all that matters. Self-satisfaction and altruism, enjoyment and indifference are not the essential thing.
If the realisation, fulfilment, service of the one Self demands from us an action that seems to others self-service
or self-assertion in the egoistic sense or seems egoistic enjoyment and self-indulgence, that action we must do;
we must be governed by the guide within rather than by the opinions of men. The influence of the environment
works often with great subtlety; we prefer and put on almost unconsciously the garb which will look best in the
eye that regards us from outside and we allow a veil to drop over the eye within; we are impelled to drape
ourselves in the vow of poverty, or in the garb of service, or in outward proofs of indifference and renunciation
and a spotless sainthood because that is what tradition and opinion demand of us and so we can make best an
impression on our environment. But all this is vanity and delusion. We may be called upon to assume these things,
for that may be the uniform of our service; but equally it may not. The eye of man outside matters nothing; the
eye within is all.
\par We see in the teaching of the Gita how subtle a thing is the freedom from egoism which is demanded.
Arjuna is driven to
Page 331

fight by the egoism of strength, the egoism of the Kshatriya; he is turned from the battle by the contrary egoism
of weakness, the shrinking, the spirit of disgust, the false pity that overcomes the mind, the nervous being and the
senses,—not that divine compassion which strengthens the arm and clarifies the knowledge. But this weakness
comes garbed as renunciation, as virtue: “Better the life of the beggar than to taste these blood-stained
enjoyments; I desire not the rule of all the earth, no, nor the kingdom of the gods.” How foolish of the Teacher,
we might say, not to confirm this mood, to lose this sublime chance of adding one more great soul to the army of
Sannyasins, one more shining example before the world of a holy renunciation. But the Guide sees otherwise, the
Guide who is not to be deceived by words; “This is weakness and delusion and egoism that speak in thee. Behold
the Self, open thy eyes to the knowledge, purify thy soul of egoism.” And afterwards? “Fight, conquer, enjoy a
wealthy kingdom.” Or to take another example from ancient Indian tradition. It was egoism, it would seem, that
drove Rama, the Avatara, to raise an army and destroy a nation in order to recover his wife from the King of
Lanka. But would it have been a lesser egoism to drape himself in indifference and misusing the formal terms of
the knowledge to say, “I have no wife, no enemy, no desire; these are illusions of the senses; let me cultivate the
Brahman-knowledge and let Ravana do what he will with the daughter of Janaka”?
\par The criterion is within, as the Gita insists. It is to have the soul free from craving and attachment, but free
from the attachment to inaction as well as from the egoistic impulse to action, free from attachment to the forms
of virtue as well as from the attraction to sin. It is to be rid of “I-ness” and “my-ness” so as to live in the one Self
and act in the one Self; to reject the egoism of refusing to work through the individual centre of the universal
Being as well as the egoism of serving the individual mind and life and body to the exclusion of others. To live in
the Self is not to dwell for oneself alone in the Infinite immersed and oblivious of all things in that ocean of
impersonal self-delight; but it is to live as the Self and in the Self equal in this
Page 332

embodiment and all embodiments and beyond all embodiments. This is the integral knowledge.
\par It will be seen that the scope we give to the idea of renunciation is different from the meaning currently
attached to it. Currently its meaning is self-denial, inhibition of pleasure, rejection of the objects of pleasure.
Self-denial is a necessary discipline for the soul of man, because his heart is ignorantly attached; inhibition of
pleasure is necessary because his sense is caught and clogged in the mud-honey of sensuous satisfactions;
rejection of the objects of pleasure is imposed because the mind fixes on the object and will not leave it to go
beyond it and within itself. If the mind of man were not thus ignorant, attached, bound even in its restless
inconstancy, deluded by the forms of things, renunciation would not have been needed; the soul could have
travelled on the path of delight, from the lesser to the greater, from joy to diviner joy. At present that is not
practicable. It must give up from within everything to which it is attached in order that it may gain that which
they are in their reality. The external renunciation is not the essential, but even that is necessary for a time,
indispensable in many things and sometimes useful in all; we may even say that a complete external renunciation
is a stage through which the soul must pass at some period of its progress,—though always it should be without
those self-willed violences and fierce self-torturings which are an offence to the Divine seated within us. But in
the end this renunciation or self-denial is always an instrument and the period for its use passes. The rejection of
the object ceases to be necessary when the object can no longer ensnare us because what the soul enjoys is no
longer the object as an object but the Divine which it expresses; the inhibition of pleasure is no longer needed
when the soul no longer seeks pleasure but possesses the delight of the Divine in all things equally without the
need of a personal or physical possession of the thing itself; self-denial loses its field when the soul no longer
claims anything, but obeys consciously the will of the one Self in all beings. It is then that we are freed from the
Law and released into the liberty of the Spirit.
\par We must be prepared to leave behind on the path not only
Page 333

that which we stigmatise as evil, but that which seems to us to be good, yet is not the one good. There are things
which were beneficial, helpful, which seemed perhaps at one time the one thing desirable, and yet once their
work is done, once they are attained, they become obstacles and even hostile forces when we are called to
advance beyond them. There are desirable states of the soul which it is dangerous to rest in after they have been
mastered, because then we do not march on to the wider kingdoms of God beyond. Even divine realisations must
not be clung to, if they are not the divine realisation in its utter essentiality and completeness. We must rest at
nothing less than the All, nothing short of the utter transcendence. And if we can thus be free in the spirit, we
shall find out all the wonder of God's workings; we shall find that in inwardly renouncing everything we have lost
nothing. “By all this abandoned thou shalt come to enjoy the All.” For everything is kept for us and restored to us
but with a wonderful change and transfiguration into the All-Good and the All-Beautiful, the All-Light and the
All-Delight of Him who is for ever pure and infinite and the mystery and the miracle that ceases not through the
ages.
Page 334

\par
\hn Chapter VI
\par
\ht The Synthesis of the Disciplines\nl of Knowledge
\par\drop In the last chapter we have spoken of renunciation in its most general scope, even as we spoke of
concentration in all its possibilities; what has been said, applies therefore equally to the path of Works and the
path of Devotion as to the path of Knowledge; for on all three concentration and renunciation are needed, though
the way and spirit in which they are applied may vary. But we must now turn more particularly to the actual
steps of the Path of Knowledge on which the double force of concentration and renunciation must aid us to
advance. Practically, this path is a reascent up the great ladder of being down which the soul has descended into
the material existence.
\par The central aim of Knowledge is the recovery of the Self, of our true self-existence, and this aim
presupposes the admission that our present mode of being is not our true self-existence. No doubt, we have
rejected the trenchant solutions which cut the knot of the riddle of the universe; we recognise it neither as a
fiction of material appearance created by Force, nor as an unreality set up by the Mind, nor as a bundle of
sensations, ideas and results of idea and sensation with a great Void or a great blissful Zero behind it to strive
towards as our true truth of eternal non-existence. We accept the Self as a reality and the universe as a reality
of the Self, a reality of its consciousness and not of mere material force and formation, but none the less or
rather all the more for that reason a reality. Still, though the universe is a fact and not a fiction, a fact of the
divine and universal and not a fiction of the individual self, our state of existence here is a state of ignorance, not
the true truth of our being. We conceive of ourselves falsely, we see ourselves as we are not; we live in a false
relation with our environment, because we know neither
Page 335

the universe nor ourselves for what they really are but with an imperfect view founded on a temporary fiction
which the Soul and Nature have established between themselves for the convenience of the evolving ego. And
this falsity is the root of a general perversion, confusion and suffering which besiege at every step both our
internal life and our relations with our environment. Our personal life and our communal life, our commerce with
ourselves and our commerce with our fellows are founded on a falsity and are therefore false in their recognised
principles and methods, although through all this error a growing truth continually seeks to express itself. Hence
the supreme importance to man of Knowledge, not what is called the practical knowledge of life, but of the
profoundest knowledge of the Self and Nature
\note{\s{\=atmaj\~n\=ana} and \s{tattvaj\~n\=ana}.} on which alone a true practice of life can be founded.
\par The error proceeds from a false identification. Nature has created within her material unity
separate-seeming bodies which the Soul manifested in material Nature enfolds, inhabits, possesses, uses; the Soul
forgetting itself experiences only this single knot in Matter and says “I am this body.” It thinks of itself as the
body, suffers with the body, enjoys with the body, is born with the body, is dissolved with the body; or so at least
it views its self-existence. Again, Nature has created within her unity of universal life separate-seeming currents
of life which form themselves into a whorl of vitality around and in each body, and the Soul manifested in vital
Nature seizes on and is seized by that current, is imprisoned momentarily in that little whirling vortex of life. The
Soul, still forgetting itself, says “I am this life”; it thinks of itself as the life, craves with its cravings or desires,
wallows in its pleasures, bleeds with its wounds, rushes or stumbles with its movements. If it is still mainly
governed by the body-sense, it identifies its own existence with that of the whorl and thinks “When this whorl is
dissipated by the dissolution of the body round which it has formed itself, then {\it I} shall be no more.” If it has
been able to sense the current of life which has formed the vortex, it thinks of itself as that
Page 336

current and says “I am this stream of life; I have entered upon the possession of this body, I shall leave it and
enter upon the possession of other bodies: I am an immortal life revolving in a cycle of constant rebirth.”
\par But again Nature has created within her mental unity, formed in the universal Mind separate-seeming
dynamos as it were of mentality, constant centres for the generation, distribution and reabsorption of mental
force and mental activities, stations as it were in a system of mental telegraphy where messages are conceived,
written, sent, received, deciphered, and these messages and these activities are of many kinds, sensational,
emotional, perceptual, conceptual, intuitional, all of which the Soul manifested in mental Nature accepts, uses for
its outlook on the world and seems to itself to project and to receive their shocks, to suffer or to master their
consequences. Nature instals the base of these dynamos in the material bodies she has formed, makes these
bodies the ground for her stations and connects the mental with the material by a nerve-system full of the
movement of vital currents through which the mind becomes conscious of the material world and, so far as it
chooses, of the vital world of Nature. Otherwise the mind would be conscious of the mental world first and
chiefly and would only indirectly glimpse the material. As it is, its attention is fixed on the body and the material
world in which it has been installed and it is aware of the rest of existence only dimly, indirectly or
subconsciously in that vast remainder of itself with regard to which superficially it has become irresponsive and
oblivious.
\par The Soul identifies itself with this mental dynamo or station and says “I am this mind.” And since the mind is
absorbed in the bodily life, it thinks “I am a mind in a living body” or, still more commonly, “I am a body which
lives and thinks.” It identifies itself with the thoughts, emotions, sensations of the embodied mind and imagines
that because when the body is dissolved all this will dissolve, itself also will cease to exist. Or if it becomes
conscious of the current of persistence of mental personality, it thinks of itself as a mental soul occupying the
body whether
Page 337

once or repeatedly and returning from earthly living to mental worlds beyond; the persistence of this mental being
mentally enjoying or suffering sometimes in the body, sometimes on the mental or vital plane of Nature it calls its
immortal existence. Or else, because the mind is a principle of light and knowledge, however imperfect, and can
have some notion of what is beyond it, it sees the possibility of a dissolution of the mental being into that which is
beyond, some Void or some eternal Existence, and it says, “There I, the mental soul, cease to be.” Such
dissolution it dreads or desires, denies or affirms according to its measure of attachment to or repulsion from this
present play of embodied mind and vitality.
\par Now, all this is a mixture of truth and falsehood. Mind, Life, Matter exist and mental, vital, physical
individualisation exists as facts in Nature, but the identification of the soul with these things is a false
identification. Mind, Life and Matter are ourselves only in this sense that they are principles of being which the
true self has evolved by the meeting and interaction of Soul and Nature in order to express a form of its one
existence as the Cosmos. Individual mind, life and body are a play of these principles which is set up in the
commerce of Soul and Nature as a means for the expression of that multiplicity of itself of which the one
Existence is eternally capable and which it holds eternally involved in its unity. Individual mind, life and body are
forms of ourselves in so far as we are centres of the multiplicity of the One; universal Mind, Life and Body are
also forms of our self, because we are that One in our being. But the self is more than universal or individual
mind, life and body and when we limit ourselves by identification with these things, we found our knowledge on a
falsehood, we falsify our determining view and our practical experience not only of our self-being but of our
cosmic existence and of our individual activities.
\par The Self is an eternal utter Being and pure existence of which all these things are becomings. From this
knowledge we have to proceed; this knowledge we have to realise and make it the foundation of the inner and
the outer life of the individual. The Yoga of Knowledge, starting from this primary truth, has conceived
Page 338

a negative and positive method of discipline by which we shall get rid of these false identifications and recoil
back from them into true self-knowledge. The negative method is to say always “I am not the body” so as to
contradict and root out the false idea “I am the body”, to concentrate on this knowledge and by renunciation of
the attachment of the soul to the physical get rid of the body-sense. We say again “I am not the life” and by
concentration on this knowledge and renunciation of attachment to the vital movements and desires, get rid of the
life-sense. We say, finally, “I am not the mind, the motion, the sense, the thought” and by concentration on this
knowledge and renunciation of the mental activities, get rid of the mind-sense. When we thus constantly create a
gulf between ourselves and the things with which we identified ourselves, their veils progressively fall away from
us and the Self begins to be visible to our experience. Of that then we say “I am That, the pure, the eternal, the
self-blissful” and by concentrating our thought and being upon it we become That and are able finally to
renounce the individual existence and the Cosmos. Another positive method belonging rather to the Rajayoga is
to concentrate on the thought of the Brahman and shut out from us all other ideas, so that this dynamo of mind
shall cease to work upon our external or varied internal existence; by mental cessation the vital and physical play
also shall fall to rest in an eternal samadhi, some inexpressible deepest trance of the being in which we shall pass
into the absolute Existence.
\par This discipline is evidently a self-centred and exclusive inner movement which gets rid of the world by
denying it in thought and shutting the eyes of the soul to it in vision. But the universe is there as a truth in God
even though the individual soul may have shut its eyes to it and the Self is there in the universe really and not
falsely, supporting all that we have rejected, truly immanent in all things, really embracing the individual in the
universal as well as embracing the universe in that which exceeds and transcends it. What shall we do with this
eternal Self in this persistent universe which we see encompassing us every time we come out of the trance of
inner meditation? The ascetic Path of Knowledge has its solution and its discipline for the soul that
Page 339

looks out on the universe. It is to regard the immanent and all-encompassing and all-constituting Self in the image
of the ether in which all forms are, which is in all forms, of which all forms are made. In that ether cosmic Life
and Mind move as the Breath of things, an atmospheric sea in the ethereal, and constitute from it all these forms;
but what they constitute are merely name and form and not realities; the form of the pot we see is a form of
earth only and goes back into the earth, earth a form resolvable into the cosmic Life, the cosmic Life a
movement that falls to rest in that silent immutable Ether. Concentrating on this knowledge, rejecting all
phenomenon and appearance, we come to see the whole as an illusion of name and form in the ether that is
Brahman; it becomes unreal to us; and the universe becoming unreal the immanence becomes unreal and there is
only the Self upon which our mind has falsely imposed the name and form of the universe. Thus are we justified
in the withdrawal of the individual self into the Absolute.
\par Still, the Self goes on with its imperishable aspect of immanence, its immutable aspect of divine envelopment,
its endless trick of becoming each thing and all things; our detection of the cheat and our withdrawal do not seem
to affect one tittle either the Self or the universe. Must we not then know also what it is that thus persists
superior to our acceptance and rejection and too great, too eternal to be affected by it? Here too there must be
some invincible reality at work and the integrality of Knowledge demands that we shall see and realise it;
otherwise it may prove that our own knowledge and not the Lord in the universe was the cheat and the illusion.
Therefore we must concentrate again and see and realise also this which persists so sovereignly and must know
the Self as no other than the Supreme Soul which is the Lord of Nature, the upholder of cosmic existence by
whose sanction it proceeds, whose will compels its multitudinous actions and determines its perpetual cycles.
And we must yet concentrate once again and see and realise and must know the Self as the one Existence who
is both the Soul of all and the Nature of all, at once Purusha and Prakriti and so able both to express himself in all
these forms of things and to be all these
Page 340

formations. Otherwise we have excluded what the Self does not exclude and made a wilful choice in our
knowledge.
\par The old ascetic Path of Knowledge admitted the unity of things and the concentration on all these aspects of
the one Existence, but it made a distinction and a hierarchy. The Self that becomes all these forms of things is
the Virat or universal Soul; the Self that creates all these forms is Hiranyagarbha, the luminous or creatively
perceptive Soul; the Self that contains all these things involved in it is Prajna, the conscious Cause or originally
determining Soul; beyond all these is the Absolute who permits all this unreality, but has no dealings with it. Into
That we must withdraw and have no farther dealings with the universe, since Knowledge means the final
Knowledge, and therefore these lesser realisations must fall away from us or be lost in That. But evidently from
our point of view these are practical distinctions made by the mind which have a value for certain purposes, but
no ultimate value. Our view of the world insists on unity; the universal Self is not different from the perceptive
and creative, nor the perceptive from the causal, nor the causal from the Absolute, but it is one “Self-being which
has become all becomings”, and which is not any other than the Lord who manifests Himself as all these
individual existences nor the Lord any other than the sole-existing Brahman who verily is all this that we can see,
sense, live or mentalise. That Self, Lord, Brahman we would know that we may realise our unity with it and with
all that it manifests and in that unity we would live. For we demand of knowledge that it shall unite; the
knowledge that divides must always be a partial knowing good for certain practical purposes; the knowledge that
unites is {\it the} knowledge.
\par Therefore our integral Yoga will take up these various disciplines and concentrations, but harmonise and if
possible fuse them by a synthesis which removes their mutual exclusions. Not realising the Lord and the All only
to reject them for silent Self or unknowable Absolute as would an exclusively transcendental, nor living for the
Lord alone or in the All alone as would an exclusively theistic or an exclusively pantheistic Yoga, the seeker
Page 341

of integral knowledge will limit himself neither in his thought nor in his practice nor in his realisation by any
religious creed or philosophical dogma. He will seek the Truth of existence in its completeness. The ancient
disciplines he will not reject, for they rest upon eternal truths, but he will give them an orientation in conformity
with his aim.
\par We must recognise that our primary aim in knowledge must be to realise our own supreme Self more than
that Self in others or as the Lord of Nature or as the All; for that is the pressing need of the individual, to arrive
at the highest truth of his own being, to set right its disorders, confusions, false identifications, to arrive at its right
concentration and purity and to know and mount to its source. But we do this not in order to disappear into its
source, but so that our whole existence and all the members of this inner kingdom may find their right basis, may
live in our highest self, live for our highest self only and obey no other law than that which proceeds from our
highest self and is given to our purified being without any falsification in the transmitting mentality. And if we do
this rightly we shall discover that in finding this supreme Self we have found the one Self in all, the one Lord of
our nature and of all Nature, the All of ourselves who is the All of the universe. For this that we see in ourselves
we must necessarily see everywhere, since that is the truth of His unity. By discovering and using rightly the
Truth of our being the barrier between our individuality and the universe will necessarily be forced open and cast
away and the Truth that we realise in our own being cannot fail to realise itself to us in the universality which will
then be our self. Realising in ourselves the “I am He” of the Vedanta, we cannot but realise in looking upon all
around us the identical knowledge on its other side, “Thou art That.” We have only to see how practically the
discipline must be conducted in order that we may arrive successfully at this great unification.
Page 342

\par
\hn Chapter VII
\par
\ht The Release from Subjection\nl to the Body
\par\drop Our first step in this path of knowledge, having once determined in our intellect that what seems is not
the Truth, that the self is not the body or life or mind, since these are only its forms, must be to set right our mind
in its practical relation with the life and the body so that it may arrive at its own right relation with the Self. This it
is easiest to do by a device with which we are already familiar, since it played a great part in our view of the
Yoga of Works; it is to create a separation between the Prakriti and the Purusha. The Purusha, the soul that
knows and commands has got himself involved in the workings of his executive conscious force, so that he
mistakes this physical working of it which we call the body for himself; he forgets his own nature as the soul that
knows and commands; he believes his mind and soul to be subject to the law and working of the body; he forgets
that he is so much else besides that is greater than the physical form; he forgets that the mind is really greater
than Matter and ought not to submit to its obscurations, reactions, habit of inertia, habit of incapacity; he forgets
that he is more even than the mind, a Power which can raise the mental being above itself; that he is the Master,
the Transcendent and it is not fit the Master should be enslaved to his own workings, the Transcendent
imprisoned in a form which exists only as a trifle in its own being. All this forgetfulness has to be cured by the
Purusha remembering his own true nature and first by his remembering that the body is only a working and only
one working of Prakriti.
\par We say then to the mind “This is a working of Prakriti, this is neither thyself nor myself; stand back from it.”
We shall find, if we try, that the mind has this power of detachment and
Page 343

can stand back from the body not only in idea, but in act and as it were physically or rather vitally. This
detachment of the mind must be strengthened by a certain attitude of indifference to the things of the body; we
must not care essentially about its sleep or its waking, its movement or its rest, its pain or its pleasure, its health
or ill-health, its vigour or its fatigue, its comfort or its discomfort, or what it eats or drinks. This does not mean
that we shall not keep the body in right order so far as we can; we have not to fall into violent asceticisms or a
positive neglect of the physical frame. But we have not either to be affected in mind by hunger or thirst or
discomfort or ill-health or attach the importance which the physical and vital man attaches to the things of the
body, or indeed any but a quite subordinate and purely instrumental importance. Nor must this instrumental
importance be allowed to assume the proportions of a necessity; we must not for instance imagine that the purity
of the mind depends on the things we eat or drink, although during a certain stage restrictions in eating and
drinking are useful to our inner progress; nor on the other hand must we continue to think that the dependence of
the mind or even of the life on food and drink is anything more than a habit, a customary relation which Nature
has set up between these principles. As a matter of fact the food we take can be reduced by contrary habit and
new relation to a minimum without the mental or vital vigour being in any way reduced; even on the contrary
with a judicious development they can be trained to a greater potentiality of vigour by learning to rely on the
secret fountains of mental and vital energy with which they are connected more than upon the minor aid of
physical aliments. This aspect of self-discipline is however more important in the Yoga of self-perfection than
here; for our present purpose the important point is the renunciation by the mind of attachment to or dependence
on the things of the body.
\par Thus disciplined the mind will gradually learn to take up towards the body the true attitude of the Purusha.
First of all, it will know the mental Purusha as the upholder of the body and not in any way the body itself; for it
is quite other than
Page 344

the physical existence which it upholds by the mind through the agency of the vital force. This will come to be so
much the normal attitude of the whole being to the physical frame that the latter will feel to us as if something
external and detachable like the dress we wear or an instrument we happen to be carrying in our hand. We may
even come to feel that the body is in a certain sense non-existent except as a sort of partial expression of our
vital force and of our mentality. These experiences are signs that the mind is coming to a right poise regarding
the body, that it is exchanging the false view-point of the mentality obsessed and captured by physical sensation
for the view-point of the true truth of things.
\par Secondly, with regard to the movements and experiences of the body the mind will come to know the
Purusha seated within it as, first, the witness or observer of the movements and, secondly, the knower or
perceiver of the experiences. It will cease to consider in thought or feel in sensation these movements and
experiences as its own but rather consider and feel them as not its own, as operations of Nature governed by the
qualities of Nature and their interaction upon each other. This detachment can be made so normal and carried so
far that there will be a kind of division between the mind and the body and the former will observe and
experience the hunger, thirst, pain, fatigue, depression, etc. of the physical being as if they were experiences of
some other person with whom it has so close a {\it rapport} as to be aware of all that is going on within him. This
division is a great means, a great step towards mastery; for the mind comes to observe these things first without
being overpowered and finally without being at all affected by them, dispassionately, with clear understanding but
with perfect detachment. This is the initial liberation of the mental being from servitude to the body; for by right
knowledge put steadily into practice liberation comes inevitably.
\par Finally, the mind will come to know the Purusha in the mind as the master of Nature whose sanction is
necessary to her movements. It will find that as the giver of the sanction he can withdraw the original fiat from
the previous habits of
Page 345

Nature and that eventually the habit will cease or change in the direction indicated by the will of the Purusha; not
at once, for the old sanction persists as an obstinate consequence of the past Karma of Nature until that is
exhausted, and a good deal also depends on the force of the habit and the idea of fundamental necessity which
the mind had previously attached to it; but if it is not one of the fundamental habits Nature has established for the
relation of the mind, life and body and if the old sanction is not renewed by the mind or the habit willingly
indulged, then eventually the change will come. Even the habit of hunger and thirst can be minimised, inhibited,
put away; the habit of disease can be similarly minimised and gradually eliminated and in the meantime the power
of the mind to set right the disorders of the body whether by conscious manipulation of vital force or by simple
mental fiat will immensely increase. By a similar process the habit by which the bodily nature associates certain
forms and degrees of activity with strain, fatigue, incapacity can be rectified and the power, freedom, swiftness,
effectiveness of the work whether physical or mental which can be done with this bodily instrument marvellously
increased, doubled, tripled, decupled.
\par This side of the method belongs properly to the Yoga of self-perfection; but it is as well to speak briefly of
these things here both because we thereby lay a basis for what we shall have to say of self-perfection, which is
a part of the integral Yoga, and because we have to correct the false notions popularised by materialistic
Science. According to this Science the normal mental and physical states and the relations between mind and
body actually established by our past evolution are the right, natural and healthy conditions and anything other,
anything opposite to them is either morbid and wrong or a hallucination, self-deception and insanity. Needless to
say, this conservative principle is entirely ignored by Science itself when it so diligently and successfully improves
on the normal operations of physical Nature for the greater mastery of Nature by man. Suffice it to say here
once for all that a change of mental and physical state and of relations between the mind and body which
increases the
Page 346

purity and freedom of the being, brings a clear joy and peace and multiplies the power of the mind over itself and
over the physical functions, brings about in a word man's greater mastery of his own nature, is obviously not
morbid and cannot be considered a hallucination or self-deception since its effects are patent and positive. In
fact, it is simply a willed advance of Nature in her evolution of the individual, an evolution which she will carry
out in any case but in which she chooses to utilise the human will as her chief agent, because her essential aim is
to lead the Purusha to conscious mastery over herself.
\par This being said, we must add that in the movement of the path of knowledge perfection of the mind and
body are no consideration at all or only secondary considerations. The one thing necessary is to rise out of
Nature to the Self by either the most swift or the most thorough and effective method possible; and the method
we are describing, though not the swiftest, is the most thorough-going in its effectivity. And here there arises the
question of physical action or inaction. It is ordinarily considered that the Yogin should draw away from action as
much as possible and especially that too much action is a hindrance because it draws off the energies outward.
To a certain extent this is true; and we must note farther that when the mental Purusha takes up the attitude of
mere witness and observer, a tendency to silence, solitude, physical calm and bodily inaction grows upon the
being. So long as this is not associated with inertia, incapacity or unwillingness to act, in a word, with the growth
of the tamasic quality, all this is to the good. The power to do nothing, which is quite different from indolence,
incapacity or aversion to action and attachment to inaction, is a great power and a great mastery; the power to
rest absolutely from action is as necessary for the Jnanayogin as the power to cease absolutely from thought, as
the power to remain indefinitely in sheer solitude and silence and as the power of immovable calm. Whoever is
not willing to embrace these states is not yet fit for the path that leads towards the highest knowledge; whoever
is unable to draw towards them, is as yet unfit for its acquisition.
\par At the same time it must be added that the power is enough;
Page 347

the abstention from all physical action is not indispensable, the aversion to action mental or corporeal is not
desirable. The seeker of the integral state of knowledge must be free from attachment to action and equally free
from attachment to inaction. Especially must any tendency to mere inertia of mind or vitality or body be
surmounted, and if that habit is found growing on the nature, the will of the Purusha must be used to dismiss it.
Eventually, a state arrives when the life and the body perform as mere instruments the will of the Purusha in the
mind without any strain or attachment, without their putting themselves into the action with that inferior, eager
and often feverish energy which is the nature of their ordinary working; they come to work as forces of Nature
work without the fret and toil and reaction characteristic of life in the body when it is not yet master of the
physical. When we attain to this perfection, then action and inaction become immaterial, since neither interferes
with the freedom of the soul or draws it away from its urge towards the Self or its poise in the Self. But this state
of perfection arrives later in the Yoga and till then the law of moderation laid down by the Gita is the best for us;
too much mental or physical action then is not good since excess draws away too much energy and reacts
unfavourably upon the spiritual condition; too little also is not good since defect leads to a habit of inaction and
even to an incapacity which has afterwards to be surmounted with difficulty. Still, periods of absolute calm,
solitude and cessation from works are highly desirable and should be secured as often as possible for that
recession of the soul into itself which is indispensable to knowledge.
\par While dealing thus with the body we have necessarily to deal also with the Prana or life-energy. For
practical purposes we have to make a distinction between the life-energy as it acts in the body, the physical
Prana, and the life-energy as it acts in support of the mental activities, the psychical Prana. For we lead always a
double life, mental and physical, and the same life-energy acts differently and assumes a different aspect
according as it lends itself to one or the other. In the body it produces those reactions of hunger, thirst, fatigue,
health, disease, physical
Page 348

vigour, etc. which are the vital experiences of the physical frame. For the gross body of man is not like the stone
or the earth; it is a combination of two sheaths, the vital and the “food” sheath and its life is a constant interaction
of these two. Still the life-energy and the physical frame are two different things and in the withdrawal of the
mind from the absorbing sense of the body we become increasingly sensible of the Prana and its action in the
corporeal instrument and can observe and more and more control its operations. Practically, in drawing back
from the body we draw back from the physical life-energy also, even while we distinguish the two and feel the
latter nearer to us than the mere physical instrument. The entire conquest of the body comes in fact by the
conquest of the physical life-energy.
\par Along with the attachment to the body and its works the attachment to life in the body is overcome. For
when we feel the physical being to be not ourselves, but only a dress or an instrument, the repulsion to the death
of the body which is so strong and vehement an instinct of the vital man must necessarily weaken and can be
thrown away. Thrown away it must be and entirely. The fear of death and the aversion to bodily cessation are
the stigma left by his animal origin on the human being. That brand must be utterly effaced.
Page 349

\par
\hn Chapter VIII
\par
\ht The Release from the Heart\nl and the Mind
\par\drop But the ascending soul has to separate itself not only from the life in the body but from the action of the
life-energy in the mind; it has to make the mind say as the representative of the Purusha “I am not the Life; the
Life is not the self of the Purusha, it is only a working and only one working of Prakriti.” The characteristics of
Life are action and movement, a reaching out to absorb and assimilate what is external to the individual and a
principle of satisfaction or dissatisfaction in what it seizes upon or what comes to it, which is associated with the
all-pervading phenomenon of attraction and repulsion. These three things are everywhere in Nature because Life
is everywhere in Nature. But in us mental beings they are all given a mental value according to the mind which
perceives and accepts them. They take the form of action, of desire and of liking and disliking, pleasure and pain.
The Prana is everywhere in us supporting not only the action of our body, but of our sense-mind, our emotional
mind, our thought-mind; and bringing its own law or dharma into all these, it confuses, it limits, it throws into
discord their right action and creates that impurity of misplacement and that tangled confusion which is the whole
evil of our psychological existence. In that confusion one law seems to reign, the law of desire. As the universal
Divine Being, all-embracing and all-possessing, acts, moves, enjoys purely for the satisfaction of divine Delight,
so the individual life acts, moves, enjoys and suffers predominantly for the satisfaction of desire. Therefore the
psychic life-energy presents itself to our experience as a sort of desire-mind, which we have to conquer if we
mean to get back to our true self.
\par Desire is at once the motive of our actions, our lever of
Page 350

accomplishment and the bane of our existence. If our sense-mind, emotional mind, thought-mind could act free
from the intrusions and importations of the life-energy, if that energy could be made to obey their right action
instead of imposing its own yoke on our existence, all human problems would move harmoniously to their right
solution. The proper function of the life-energy is to do what it is bidden by the divine principle in us, to reach to
and enjoy what is given to it by that indwelling Divine and not to desire at all. The proper function of the
sense-mind is to lie open passively, luminously to the contacts of Life and transmit their sensations and the
\s{rasa} or right taste and principle of delight in them to the higher function; but interfered with by the attractions
and repulsions, the acceptances and refusals, the satisfactions and dissatisfactions, the capacities and incapacities
of the life-energy in the body it is, to begin with, limited in its scope and, secondly, forced in these limits to
associate itself with all these discords of the life in Matter. It becomes an instrument for pleasure and pain
instead of for delight of existence.
\par Similarly the emotional mind compelled to take note of all these discords and subject itself to their emotional
reactions becomes a hurtling field of joy and grief, love and hatred, wrath, fear, struggle, aspiration, disgust, likes,
dislikes, indifferences, content, discontent, hopes, disappointments, gratitude, revenge and all the stupendous play
of passion which is the drama of life in the world. This chaos we call our soul. But the real soul, the real psychic
entity which for the most part we see little of and only a small minority in mankind has developed, is an
instrument of pure love, joy and the luminous reaching out to fusion and unity with God and our fellow-creatures.
This psychic entity is covered up by the play of the mentalised Prana or desire-mind which we mistake for the
soul; the emotional mind is unable to mirror the real soul in us, the Divine in our hearts, and is obliged instead to
mirror the desire-mind.
\par So too the proper function of the thought-mind is to observe, understand, judge with a dispassionate delight in
knowledge and open itself to messages and illuminations playing upon all that it observes and upon all that is yet
hidden from it but must
Page 351

progressively be revealed, messages and illuminations that secretly flash down to us from the divine Oracle
concealed in light above our mentality whether they seem to descend through the intuitive mind or arise from the
seeing heart. But this it cannot do rightly because it is pinned to the limitations of the life-energy in the senses, to
the discords of sensation and emotion, and to its own limitations of intellectual preference, inertia, straining,
self-will which are the form taken in it by the interference of this desire-mind, this psychic Prana. As is said in
the Upanishads, our whole mind-consciousness is shot through with the threads and currents of this Prana, this
Life-energy that strives and limits, grasps and misses, desires and suffers, and only by its purification can we
know and possess our real and eternal self.
\par It is true that the root of all this evil is the ego-sense and that the seat of the conscious ego-sense is the mind
itself; but in reality the conscious mind only reflects an ego already created in the subconscious mind in things,
the dumb soul in the stone and the plant which is present in all body and life and only finally delivered into
voicefulness and wakefulness but not originally created by the conscious mind. And in this upward procession it
is the life-energy which has become the obstinate knot of the ego, it is the desire-mind which refuses to relax the
knot even when the intellect and the heart have discovered the cause of their ills and would be glad enough to
remove it; for the Prana in them is the Animal who revolts and who obscures and deceives their knowledge and
coerces their will by his refusal.
\par Therefore the mental Purusha has to separate himself from association and self-identification with this
desire-mind. He has to say “I am not this thing that struggles and suffers, grieves and rejoices, loves and hates,
hopes and is baffled, is angry and afraid and cheerful and depressed, a thing of vital moods and emotional
passions. All these are merely workings and habits of Prakriti in the sensational and emotional mind.” The mind
then draws back from its emotions and becomes with these, as with the bodily movements and experiences, the
observer or witness. There is again an inner cleavage. There is this emotional mind in which these moods and
passions continue to occur according to
Page 352

the habit of the modes of Nature and there is the observing mind which sees them, studies and understands but is
detached from them. It observes them as if in a sort of action and play on a mental stage of personages other
than itself, at first with interest and a habit of relapse into identification, then with entire calm and detachment,
and, finally, attaining not only to calm but to the pure delight of its own silent existence, with a smile at their
unreality as at the imaginary joys and sorrows of a child who is playing and loses himself in the play. Secondly, it
becomes aware of itself as master of the sanction who by his withdrawal of sanction can make this play to
cease. When the sanction is withdrawn, another significant phenomenon takes place; the emotional mind
becomes normally calm and pure and free from these reactions, and even when they come, they no longer rise
from within but seem to fall on it as impressions from outside to which its fibres are still able to respond; but this
habit of response dies away and the emotional mind is in time entirely liberated from the passions which it has
renounced. Hope and fear, joy and grief, liking and disliking, attraction and repulsion, content and discontent,
gladness and depression, horror and wrath and fear and disgust and shame and the passions of love and hatred
fall away from the liberated psychic being.
\par What takes their place? It may be, if we will, an entire calm, silence and indifference. But although this is a
stage through which the soul has usually to pass, it is not the final aim we have placed before us. Therefore the
Purusha becomes also the master who wills and whose will it is to replace wrong by right enjoyment of the
psychic existence. What he wills, Nature executes. What was fabric-stuff of desire and passion, is turned into
reality of pure, equal and calmly intense love and joy and oneness. The real soul emerges and takes the place left
vacant by the desire-mind. The cleansed and emptied cup is filled with the wine of divine love and delight and no
longer with the sweet and bitter poison of passion. The passions, even the passion for good, misrepresent the
divine nature. The passion of pity with its impure elements of physical repulsion and emotional inability to bear
the suffering of others has to be rejected and replaced by
Page 353

the higher divine compassion which sees, understands, accepts the burden of others and is strong to help and
heal, not with self-will and revolt against the suffering in the world and with ignorant accusation of the law of
things and their source, but with light and knowledge and as an instrument of the Divine in its emergence. So too
the love that desires and grasps and is troubled with joy and shaken with grief must be rejected for the equal,
all-embracing love that is free from these things and has no dependence upon circumstances and is not modified
by response or absence of response. So we shall deal with all the movements of the soul; but of these things we
shall speak farther when we consider the Yoga of self-perfection.
\par As with action and inaction, so it is with this dual possibility of indifference and calm on the one side and
active joy and love on the other. Equality, not indifference is the basis. Equal endurance, impartial indifference,
calm submission to the causes of joy and grief without any reaction of either grief or joy are the preparation and
negative basis of equality; but equality is not fulfilled till it takes its positive form of love and delight. The
sense-mind must find the equal \s{rasa} of the All-Beautiful, the heart the equal love and Ananda for all, the
psychic Prana the enjoyment of this \s{rasa}, love and Ananda. This, however, is the positive perfection that
comes by liberation; our first object on the path of knowledge is rather the liberation that comes by detachment
from the desire-mind and by the renunciation of its passions.
\par The desire-mind must also be rejected from the instrument of thought and this is best done by the
detachment of the Purusha from thought and opinion itself. Of this we have already had occasion to speak when
we considered in what consists the integral purification of the being. For all this movement of knowledge which
we are describing is a method of purification and liberation whereby entire and final self-knowledge becomes
possible, a progressive self-knowledge being itself the instrument of the purification and liberation. The method
with the thought-mind will be the same as with all the rest of the being. The Purusha, having used the
thought-mind for release
Page 354

from identification with the life and body and with the mind of desire and sensations and emotions, will turn round
upon the thought-mind itself and will say “This too I am not; I am not the thought or the thinker; all these ideas,
opinions, speculations, strivings of the intellect, its predilections, preferences, dogmas, doubts, self-corrections are
not myself; all this is only a working of Prakriti which takes place in the thought-mind.” Thus a division is created
between the mind that thinks and wills and the mind that observes and the Purusha becomes the witness only; he
sees, he understands the process and laws of his thought, but detaches himself from it. Then as the master of the
sanction he withdraws his past sanction from the tangle of the mental undercurrent and the reasoning intellect
and causes both to cease from their importunities. He becomes liberated from subjection to the thinking mind and
capable of the utter silence.
\par For perfection there is necessary also the resumption by the Purusha of his position as the lord of his Nature
and the will to replace the mere mental undercurrent and intellect by the truth-conscious thought that lightens
from above. But the silence is necessary; in the silence and not in the thought we shall find the Self, we shall
become aware of it, not merely conceive it, and we shall withdraw out of the mental Purusha into that which is
the source of the mind. But for this withdrawal a final liberation is needed, the release from the ego-sense in the
mind.
Page 355

\par
\hn Chapter IX
\par
\ht The Release from the Ego
\par\drop The formation of a mental and vital ego tied to the body-sense was the first great labour of the cosmic
Life in its progressive evolution; for this was the means it found for creating out of matter a conscious individual.
The dissolution of this limiting ego is the one condition, the necessary means for this very same Life to arrive at
its divine fruition: for only so can the conscious individual find either his transcendent self or his true Person. This
double movement is usually represented as a fall and a redemption or a creation and a destruction,—the kindling
of a light and its extinction or the formation first of a smaller temporary and unreal self and a release from it into
our true self's eternal largeness. For human thought falls apart towards two opposite extremes: one, mundane
and pragmatic, regards the fulfilment and satisfaction of the mental, vital and physical ego-sense individual or
collective as the object of life and looks no farther, while the other, spiritual, philosophic or religious, regards the
conquest of the ego in the interests of the soul, spirit or whatever be the ultimate entity, as the one thing
supremely worth doing. Even in the camp of the ego there are two divergent attitudes which divide the mundane
or materialist theory of the universe. One tendency of this thought regards the mental ego as a creation of our
mentality which will be dissolved with the dissolution of mind by the death of the body; the one abiding truth is
eternal Nature working in the race—this or another—and her purpose should be followed, not ours,—the
fulfilment of the race, the collective ego, and not that of the individual should be the rule of life. Another trend of
thought, more vitalistic in its tendencies, fixes on the conscious ego as the supreme achievement of Nature, no
matter how transitory, ennobles it into a human representative of the Will-to-be and holds up its greatness and
satisfaction as the highest aim of our
Page 356

existence. In the more numerous systems that take their stand on some kind of religious thought or spiritual
discipline there is a corresponding divergence. The Buddhist denies the existence of a real self or ego, admits no
universal or transcendent Being. The Adwaitin declares the apparently individual soul to be none other than the
supreme Self and Brahman, its individuality an illusion; the putting off of individual existence is the only true
release. Other systems assert, in flat contradiction of this view, the eternal persistence of the human soul; a basis
of multiple consciousness in the One or else a dependent but still separate entity, it is constant, real, imperishable.
\par Amidst these various and conflicting opinions the seeker of the Truth has to decide for himself which shall
be for him the Knowledge. But if our aim is a spiritual release or a spiritual fulfilment, then the exceeding of this
little mould of ego is imperative. In human egoism and its satisfaction there can be no divine culmination and
deliverance. A certain purification from egoism is the condition even of ethical progress and elevation, for social
good and perfection; much more is it indispensable for inner peace, purity and joy. But a much more radical
deliverance, not only from egoism but from ego-idea and ego-sense, is needed if our aim is to raise human into
divine nature. Experience shows that, in proportion as we deliver ourselves from the limiting mental and vital ego,
we command a wider life, a larger existence, a higher consciousness, a happier soul-state, even a greater
knowledge, power and scope. Even the aim which the most mundane philosophy pursues, the fulfilment,
perfection, satisfaction of the individual, is best assured not by satisfying the narrow ego but by finding freedom
in a higher and larger self. There is no happiness in smallness of the being, says the Scripture, it is with the large
being that happiness comes. The ego is by its nature a smallness of being; it brings contraction of the
consciousness and with the contraction limitation of knowledge, disabling ignorance,—confinement and a
diminution of power and by that diminution incapacity and weakness,—scission of oneness and by that scission
disharmony and failure of sympathy and love and understanding,—inhibition or fragmentation of
Page 357

delight of being and by that fragmentation pain and sorrow. To recover what is lost we must break out of the
walls of ego. The ego must either disappear in impersonality or fuse into a larger I: it must fuse into the wider
cosmic “I” which comprehends all these smaller selves or the transcendent of which even the cosmic self is a
diminished image.
\par But this cosmic self is spiritual in essence and in experience; it must not be confused with the collective
existence, with any group soul or the life and body of a human society or even of all mankind. The subordination
of the ego to the progress and happiness of the human race is now a governing idea in the world's thought and
ethics; but this is a mental and moral and not a spiritual ideal. For that progress is a series of constant mental,
vital and physical vicissitudes, it has no firm spiritual content, and offers no sure standing-ground to the soul of
man. The consciousness of collective humanity is only a larger comprehensive edition or a sum of individual
egos. Made of the same substance, in the same mould of nature, it has not in it any greater light, any more
eternal sense of itself, any purer source of peace, joy and deliverance. It is rather even more tortured, troubled
and obscured, certainly more vague, confused and unprogressive. The individual is in this respect greater than the
mass and cannot be called on to subordinate his more luminous possibilities to this darker entity. If light, peace,
deliverance, a better state of existence are to come, they must descend into the soul from something wider than
the individual, but also from something higher than the collective ego. Altruism, philanthropy, the service of
mankind are in themselves mental or moral ideals, not laws of the spiritual life. If into the spiritual aim there
enters the impulse to deny the personal self or to serve humanity or the world at large, it comes not from the ego
nor from the collective sense of the race, but from something more occult and profound transcendent of both
these things; for it is founded on a sense of the Divine in all and it works not for the sake of the ego or the race
but for the sake of the Divine and its purpose in the person or group or collective. It is this transcendent Source
which we must seek and serve, this vaster
Page 358

being and consciousness to which the race and the individual are minor terms of its existence.
\par There is indeed a truth behind the pragmatic impulse which an exclusive one-sided spirituality is apt to ignore
or deny or belittle. It is this that since the individual and the universal are terms of that higher and vaster Being,
their fulfilment must have some real place in the supreme Existence. There must be behind them some high
purpose in the supreme Wisdom and Knowledge, some eternal strain in the supreme Delight: they cannot have
been, they were not created in vain. But the perfection and satisfaction of humanity like the perfection and
satisfaction of the individual, can only be securely compassed and founded upon a more eternal yet unseized truth
and right of things. Minor terms of some greater Existence, they can fulfil themselves only when that of which
they are the terms is known and possessed. The greatest service to humanity, the surest foundation for its true
progress, happiness and perfection is to prepare or find the way by which the individual and the collective man
can transcend the ego and live in its true self, no longer bound to ignorance, incapacity, disharmony and sorrow.
It is by the pursuit of the eternal and not by living bound in the slow collective evolution of Nature that we can
best assure even that evolutionary, collective, altruistic aim our modern thought and idealism have set before us.
But it is in itself a secondary aim; to find, know and possess the Divine existence, consciousness and nature and
to live in it for the Divine is our true aim and the one perfection to which we must aspire.
\par It is then in the way of the spiritual philosophies and religions, not in that of any earth-bound materialistic
doctrine, that the seeker of the highest knowledge has to walk, even if with enriched aims and a more
comprehensive spiritual purpose. But how far has he to proceed in the elimination of the ego? In the ancient way
of knowledge we arrive at the elimination of the ego-sense which attaches itself to the body, to the life, to the
mind and says of all or any of them, “This is I”. Not only do we, as in the way of works, get rid of the “I” of the
worker and see the Lord alone as the true source of all works and sanction
Page 359

of works and His executive Nature-power or else His supreme Shakti as the sole agent and worker,—but we get
rid also of the ego-sense which mistakes the instruments or the expressions of our being for our true self and
spirit. But even if all this has been done, something remains still; there remains a substratum of all these, a
general sense of the separate I. This substratum ego is something vague, indefinable, elusive; it does not or need
not attach itself to anything in particular as the self; it does not identify itself with anything collective; it is a sort
of fundamental form or power of the mind which compels the mental being to feel himself as a perhaps
indefinable but still a limited being which is not mind, life or body, but under which their activities proceed in
Nature. The others were a qualified ego-idea and ego-sense supporting themselves on the play of the Prakriti;
but this is the pure fundamental ego-power supporting itself on the consciousness of the mental Purusha. And
because it seems to be above or behind the play and not in it, because it does not say “I am the mind, life or
body,” but “I am a being on whom the action of mind, life and body depends,” many think themselves released
and mistake this elusive Ego for the One, the Divine, the true Purusha or at the very least for the true Person
within them,—mistaking the indefinable for the Infinite. But so long as this fundamental ego-sense remains, there
is no absolute release. The egoistic life, even if diminished in force and intensity, can still continue well enough
with this support. If there is the error in identification, the ego life may under that pretext get rather an
exaggerated intensity and force. Even if there is no such error, the ego life may be wider, purer, more flexible
and release may be now much easier to attain and nearer to accomplishment, but still there is as yet no definitive
release. It is imperative to go farther, to get rid of this indefinable but fundamental ego-sense also and get back to
the Purusha on whom it is supporting itself, of whom it is a shadow; the shadow has to disappear and by its
disappearance reveal the spirit's unclouded substance.
\par That substance is the self of the man called in European thought the Monad, in Indian philosophy, Jiva or
Jivatman, the living entity, the self of the living creature. This Jiva is not the
Page 360

mental ego-sense constructed by the workings of Nature for her temporary purpose. It is not a thing bound, as
the mental being, the vital, the physical are bound, by her habits, laws or processes. The Jiva is a spirit and self,
superior to Nature. It is true that it consents to her acts, reflects her moods and upholds the triple medium of
mind, life and body through which she casts them upon the soul's consciousness; but it is itself a living reflection
or a soul-form or a self-creation of the Spirit universal and transcendent. The One Spirit who has mirrored some
of His modes of being in the world and in the soul, is multiple in the Jiva. That Spirit is the very Self of our self,
the One and the Highest, the Supreme we have to realise, the infinite existence into which we have to enter. And
so far the teachers walk in company, all agreeing that this is the supreme object of knowledge, of works and of
devotion, all agreeing that if it is to be attained, the Jiva must release himself from the ego-sense which belongs
to the lower Nature or Maya. But here they part company and each goes his own way. The Monist fixes his feet
on the path of an exclusive Knowledge and sets for us as sole ideal an entire return, loss, immersion or extinction
of the Jiva in the Supreme. The Dualist or the partial Monist turns to the path of Devotion and directs us to shed
indeed the lower ego and material life, but to see as the highest destiny of the spirit of man, not the
self-annihilation of the Buddhist, not the self-immersion of the Adwaitin, not a swallowing up of the many by the
One, but an eternal existence absorbed in the thought, love and enjoyment of the Supreme, the One, the
All-Lover.
\par For the disciple of an integral Yoga there can be no hesitation; as a seeker of knowledge it is the integral
knowledge and not anything either half-way and attractive or high-pinnacled and exclusive he must seek. He
must soar to the utmost height, but also circle and spread to the most all-embracing wideness, not binding himself
to any rigid structure of metaphysical thought, but free to admit and combine all the soul's highest and greatest
and fullest and most numerous experiences. If the highest height of spiritual experience, the sheer summit of all
realisation is the absolute union of the soul with the \NH Transcendent
Page 361

who exceeds the individual and the universe, the widest scope of that union is the discovery of that very
Transcendent as the source, support, continent, informing and constituent spirit and substance of both these
manifesting powers of the divine Essence and the divine Nature. Whatever the path, this must be for him the
goal. The Yoga of Action also is not fulfilled, is not absolute, is not victoriously complete until the seeker has felt
and lives in his essential and integral oneness with the Supreme. One he must be with the Divine both in his
highest and inmost and in his widest being and consciousness, in his work, his will, his power of action, his mind,
body, life. Otherwise he is only released from the illusion of individual works, but not released from the illusion of
separate being and instrumentality. As the servant and instrument of the Divine he works, but the crown of his
labour and its perfect base or motive is oneness with that which he serves and fulfils. The Yoga of devotion too
is complete only when the lover and the Beloved are unified and difference is abolished in the ecstasy of a divine
oneness; and yet in the mystery of this unification there is the sole existence of the Beloved but no extinction or
absorption of the lover. It is the highest unity which is the express direction of the path of knowledge, the call to
absolute oneness is its impulse, the experience of it its magnet, but it is this very highest unity which takes as its
field of manifestation in him the largest possible cosmic wideness. Obeying the necessity to withdraw
successively from the practical egoism of our triple nature and its fundamental ego-sense, we come to the
realisation of the spirit, the self, lord of this individual human manifestation, but our knowledge is not integral if we
do not make this self in the individual one with the cosmic spirit and find their greater reality above in an
inexpressible but not unknowable Transcendence. The Jiva, possessed of himself, must give himself up into the
being of the Divine. The self of the man must be made one with the Self of all; the self of the finite individual
must pour itself into the boundless finite and that cosmic spirit too must be exceeded in the transcendent Infinite.
\par This cannot be done without an uncompromising abolition
Page 362

of the ego-sense at its very basis and source. In the path of Knowledge one attempts this abolition, negatively by
a denial of the reality of the ego, positively by a constant fixing of the thought upon the idea of the One and the
Infinite in itself or the One and Infinite everywhere. This, if persistently done, changes in the end the mental
outlook on oneself and the whole world and there is a kind of mental realisation; but afterwards by degrees or
perhaps rapidly and imperatively and almost at the beginning the mental realisation deepens into spiritual
experience—a realisation in the very substance of our being. More and more frequent conditions come of
something indefinable and illimitable, a peace, a silence, a joy, a bliss beyond expression, a sense of absolute
impersonal Power, a pure existence, a pure consciousness, an all-pervading Presence. The ego persists in itself
or in its habitual movements, but the place of the one becomes more and more loosened, the others are broken,
crushed, more and more rejected, becoming weak in their intensity, limp or mechanical in their action. In the end
there is a constant giving up of the whole consciousness into the being of the Supreme. In the beginning when the
restless confusion and obscuring impurity of our outward nature is active, when the mental, vital, physical
ego-sense are still powerful, this new mental outlook, these experiences may be found difficult in the extreme:
but once that triple egoism is discouraged or moribund and the instruments of the Spirit are set right and purified,
in an entirely pure, silent, clarified, widened consciousness the purity, infinity, stillness of the One reflects itself
like the sky in a limpid lake. A meeting or a taking in of the reflected Consciousness by that which reflects it
becomes more and more pressing and possible; the bridging or abolition of the atmospheric gulf between that
immutable ethereal impersonal vastness and this once mobile whirl or narrow stream of personal existence is no
longer an arduous improbability and may be even a frequent experience, if not yet an entirely permanent state.
For even before complete purification, if the strings of the egoistic heart and mind are already sufficiently frayed
and loosened, the Jiva can by a sudden snapping of the main cords escape, ascending like a
Page 363

bird freed into the spaces or widening like a liberated flood into the One and Infinite. There is first a sudden
sense of a cosmic consciousness, a casting of oneself into the universal; from that universality one can aspire
more easily to the Transcendent. There is a pushing back and rending or a rushing down of the walls that
imprisoned our conscious being; there is a loss of all sense of individuality and personality, of all placement in
Space or Time or action and law of Nature; there is no longer an ego, a person definite and definable, but only
consciousness, only existence, only peace or bliss; one becomes immortality, becomes eternity, becomes infinity.
All that is left of the personal soul is a hymn of peace and freedom and bliss vibrating somewhere in the Eternal.
\par When there is an insufficient purity in the mental being, the release appears at first to be partial and
temporary; the Jiva seems to descend again into the egoistic life and the higher consciousness to be withdrawn
from him. In reality, what happens is that a cloud or veil intervenes between the lower nature and the higher
consciousness and the Prakriti resumes for a time its old habit of working under the pressure but not always with
a knowledge or present memory of that high experience. What works in it then is a ghost of the old ego
supporting a mechanical repetition of the old habits upon the remnants of confusion and impurity still left in the
system. The cloud intervenes and disappears, the rhythm of ascent and descent renews itself until the impurity
has been worked out. This period of alternations may easily be long in the integral Yoga; for there an entire
perfection of the system is required; it must be capable at all times and in all conditions and all circumstances,
whether of action or inaction, of admitting and then living in the consciousness of the supreme Truth. Nor is it
enough for the sadhaka to have the utter realisation only in the trance of Samadhi or in a motionless quietude, but
he must in trance or in waking, in passive reflection or energy of action be able to remain in the constant
Samadhi of the firmly founded Brahmic consciousness.
\note{Gita.} But if
Page 364

or when our conscious being has become sufficiently pure and clear, then there is a firm station in the higher
consciousness. The impersonalised Jiva, one with the universal or possessed by the Transcendent, lives
high-seated above
\note{\s{Ud\=as\=ina}, the word for the spiritual “indifference”, that is to say the unattached freedom of the soul
touched by the supreme knowledge.} and looks down undisturbed at whatever remnants of the old working of
Nature may revisit the system. He cannot be moved by the workings of the three modes of Prakriti in his lower
being, nor can he be shaken from his station by the attacks even of grief and suffering. And finally, there being
no veil between, the higher peace overpowers the lower disturbance and mobility. There is a settled silence in
which the soul can take sovereign possession of itself above and below and altogether.
\par Such possession is not indeed the aim of the traditional Yoga of knowledge whose object is rather to get
away from the above and the below and the all into the indefinable Absolute. But whatever the aim, the path of
knowledge must lead to one first result, an absolute quietude; for unless the old action of Nature in us be entirely
quieted, it is difficult if not impossible to found either any true soul-status or any divine activity. Our nature acts
on a basis of confusion and restless compulsion to action, the Divine acts freely out of a fathomless calm. Into
that abyss of tranquillity we must plunge and become that, if we are to annul the hold of this lower nature upon
the soul. Therefore the universalised Jiva first ascends into the Silence; it becomes vast, tranquil, actionless.
What action takes place, whether of body and these organs or any working whatever, the Jiva sees but does not
take part in, authorise or in any way associate itself with it. There is action, but no personal actor, no bondage, no
responsibility. If personal action is needed, then the Jiva has to keep or recover what has been called the form of
the ego, a sort of mental image of an “I” that is the knower, devotee, servant or instrument, but an image only
and not a reality. If even that is not there, still action can continue by the mere continued force of Prakriti,
without any personal actor, without indeed there
Page 365

being any sense of an actor at all; for the Self into which the Jiva has cast its being is the actionless, the
fathomlessly still. The path of works leads to the realisation of the Lord, but here even the Lord is not known;
there is only the silent Self and Prakriti doing her works, even, as it seems at first, not with truly living entities but
with names and forms existing in the Self but which the Self does not admit as real. The soul may go even
beyond this realisation; it may either rise to the Brahman on the other side of all idea of Self as a Void of
everything that is here, a Void of unnameable peace and extinction of all, even of the Sat, even of that Existent
which is the impersonal basis of individual or universal personality; or else it may unite with it as an ineffable
“That” of which nothing can be said; for the universe and all that is does not even exist in That, but appears to
the mind as a dream more unsubstantial than any dream ever seen or imagined, so that even the word dream
seems too positive a thing to express its entire unreality. These experiences are the foundation of that lofty
Illusionism which takes such firm hold of the human mind in its highest overleapings of itself.
\par These ideas of dream and illusion are simply results in our still existent mentality of the new poise of the Jiva
and its denial of the claim made upon it by its old mental associations and view of life and existence. In reality,
the Prakriti does not act for itself or by its own motion, but with the Self as lord; for out of that Silence wells all
this action, that apparent Void looses out as if into movement all these infinite riches of experience. To this
realisation the sadhaka of the integral Yoga must arrive by the process that we shall hereafter describe. What
then, when he so resumes his hold upon the universe and views no longer himself in the world but the cosmos in
himself, will be the position of the Jiva or what will fill in his new consciousness the part of the ego-sense? There
will be no ego-sense even if there is a sort of individualisation for the purposes of the play of universal
consciousness in an individual mind and frame; and for this reason that all will be unforgettably the One and
every Person or Purusha will be to him the One in many forms or rather in many aspects and poises, Brahman
acting upon Brahman, one
Page 366

Nara-Narayana
\note{The Divine, Narayana, making itself one with humanity even as the human, Nara becomes one with the
Divine.} everywhere. In that larger play of the Divine the joy of the relations of divine love also is possible
without the lapse into the ego-sense,—just as the supreme state of human love likewise is described as the unity
of one soul in two bodies. The ego-sense is not indispensable to the world-play in which it is so active and so
falsifies the truth of things; the truth is always the One at work on itself, at play with itself, infinite in unity, infinite
in multiplicity. When the individualised consciousness rises to and lives in that truth of the cosmic play, then even
in full action, even in possession of the lower being the Jiva remains still one with the Lord, and there is no
bondage and no delusion. He is in possession of Self and released from the ego.
Page 367

\par
\hn Chapter X
\par
\ht The Realisation of the Cosmic Self
\par\drop Our first imperative aim when we draw back from mind, life, body and all else that is not our eternal
being, is to get rid of the false idea of self by which we identify ourselves with the lower existence and can
realise only our apparent being as perishable or mutable creatures in a perishable or ever mutable world. We
have to know ourselves as the self, the spirit, the eternal; we have to exist consciously in our true being.
Therefore this must be our primary, if not our first one and all-absorbing idea and effort in the path of knowledge.
But when we have realised the eternal self that we are, when we have become that inalienably, we have still a
secondary aim, to establish the true relation between this eternal self that we are and the mutable existence and
mutable world which till now we had falsely taken for our real being and our sole possible status.
\par In order that there should be any real relation, it must be a relation between two realities. Formerly we had
thought the eternal self to be a remote concept far from our mundane existence if not an illusion and an unreality,
because in the nature of things we could not conceive of ourselves as anything except this mind, life, body,
changing and moving in the succession of Time. When we have once got rid of our confinement to this lower
status, we are apt to seize on the other side of the same erroneous relation between self and world; we tend to
regard this eternity which we increasingly are or in which we live as the sole reality and begin to look down from
it upon the world and man as a remote illusion and unreality, because that is a status quite opposite to our new
foundation in which we no longer place our roots of consciousness, from which we have been lifted up and
transfigured and with which we seem to have no longer any binding link. Especially is this likely to happen if we
have made the finding of the eternal Self not only our primary, but our
Page 368

one and absorbing objective in the withdrawal from the lower triplicity; for then we are likely to shoot at once
from pure mind to pure spirit without treading the stairs between this middle and that summit and we tend to fix
on our consciousness the profound sense of a gulf which we cannot bridge and can no longer cross over again
except by a painful fall.
\par But the self and the world are in an eternal close relation and there is a connection between them, not a gulf
that has to be overleaped. Spirit and material existence are highest and lowest rung of an orderly and progressive
series. Therefore between the two there must be a real relation and principle of connection by which the eternal
Brahman is able to be at once pure Spirit and Self and yet hold in himself the universe of himself; and it must be
possible for the soul that is one with or in union with the Eternal to adopt the same poise of divine relation in
place of our present ignorant immersion in the world. This principle of connection is the eternal unity between the
Self and all existences; of that eternal unity the liberated soul must be capable, just as the ever free and unbound
Divine is capable of it, and that we should realise equally with the pure self-existence at which we have first to
aim. For integral self-possession we must be one not only with the Self, with God, but with all existences. We
must take back in the right relation and in the poise of an eternal Truth the world of our manifested existence
peopled by our fellow-beings from which we had drawn back because we were bound to them in a wrong
relation and in the poise of a falsehood created in Time by the principle of divided consciousness with all its
oppositions, discords and dualities. We have to take back all things and beings into our new consciousness but as
one with all, not divided from them by an egoistic individuality.
\par In other words, besides the consciousness of the transcendent Self pure, self-existent, timeless, spaceless
we have to accept and become the cosmic consciousness, we have to identify our being with the Infinite who
makes himself the base and continent of the worlds and dwells in all existences. This is the realisation which the
ancient Vedantins spoke of as seeing all existences in the self and the self in all existences; and in addition they
speak
Page 369

of the crowning realisation of the man in whom the original miracle of existence has been repeated, self-being
has become all these existences that belong to the worlds of the becoming.
\note{Isha Upanishad.} In these three terms is expressed, fundamentally, the whole of that real relation between
the self and the world which we have to substitute for the false relation created by the limiting ego. This is the
new vision and sense of infinite being which we have to acquire, this the foundation of that unity with all which
we have to establish.
\par For our real self is not the individual mental being, that is only a figure, an appearance; our real self is
cosmic, infinite, it is one with all existence and the inhabitant of all existences. The self behind our mind, life and
body is the same as the self behind the mind, life and body of all our fellow-beings, and if we come to possess it,
we shall naturally, when we turn to look out again upon them, tend to become one with them in the common basis
of our consciousness. It is true that the mind opposes any such identification and if we allow it to persist in its old
habits and activities, it will rather strive to bring again its veil of dissonances over our new realisation and
possession of self than to shape and subject itself to this true and eternal vision of things. But in the first place, if
we have proceeded rightly on the path of our Yoga, we shall have attained to Self through a purified mind and
heart, and a purified mind is one that is necessarily passive and open to the knowledge. Secondly, even the mind
in spite of its tendency to limit and divide can be taught to think in the rhythm of the unifying Truth instead of the
broken terms of the limiting appearance. We must therefore accustom it by meditation and concentration to
cease to think of things and beings as separately existent in themselves and rather to think always of the One
everywhere and of all things as the One. Although we have spoken hitherto of the withdrawing motion of the
Jiva as the first necessity of knowledge and as if it were to be pursued alone and by itself, yet in fact it is better
for the sadhaka of the integral Yoga to unite the two movements. By
Page 370

one he will find the self within, by the other he will find that self in all that seems to us at present to be outside us.
It is possible indeed to begin with the latter movement, to realise all things in this visible and sensible existence as
God or Brahman or Virat Purusha and then to go beyond to all that is behind the Virat. But this has its
inconveniences and it is better, if that be found possible, to combine the two movements.
\par This realisation of all things as God or Brahman has, as we have seen, three aspects of which we can
conveniently make three successive stages of experience. First, there is the Self in whom all beings exist. The
Spirit, the Divine has manifested itself as infinite self-extended being, self-existent, pure, not subject to Time and
Space, but supporting Time and Space as figures of its consciousness. It is more than all things and contains
them all within that self-extended being and consciousness, not bound by anything that it creates, holds or
becomes, but free and infinite and all-blissful. It holds them, in the old image, as the infinite ether contains in itself
all objects. This image of the ethereal (Akasha) Brahman may indeed be of great practical help to the sadhaka
who finds a difficulty in meditating on what seems to him at first an abstract and unseizable idea. In the image of
the ether, not physical but an encompassing ether of vast being, consciousness and bliss, he may seek to see with
the mind and to feel in his mental being this supreme existence and to identify it in oneness with the self within
him. By such meditation the mind may be brought to a favourable state of predisposition in which, by the rending
or withdrawing of the veil, the supramental vision may flood the mentality and change entirely all our seeing. And
upon that change of seeing, as it becomes more and more potent and insistent and occupies all our
consciousness, there will supervene eventually a change of becoming so that what we see we become. We shall
be in our self-consciousness not so much cosmic as ultra-cosmic, infinite. Mind and life and body will then be
only movements in that infinity which we have become, and we shall see that what exists is not world at all but
simply this infinity of spirit in which move the mighty cosmic harmonies of its own images of self-conscious
becoming.
Page 371

\par But what then of all these forms and existences that make up the harmony? Shall they be to us only images,
empty name and form without any informing reality, poor worthless things in themselves and however grandiose,
puissant or beautiful they once seemed to our mental vision, now to be rejected and held of no value? Not so;
although that would be the first natural result of a very intense absorption in the infinity of the all-containing Self
to the exclusion of the infinities that it contains. But these things are not empty, not mere unreal name and form
imagined by a cosmic Mind; they are, as we have said, in their reality self-conscious becomings of the Self, that
is to say, the Self dwells within all of them even as within us, conscious of them, governing their motion, blissful in
his habitation as in his embrace of all that he becomes. As the ether both contains and is as it were contained in
the jar, so this Self both contains and inhabits all existences, not in a physical but in a spiritual sense, and is their
reality. This indwelling State of the Self we have to realise; we have to see and ourselves to become in our
consciousness the Self in all existences. We have, putting aside all vain resistance of the intellect and the mental
associations, to know that the Divine inhabits all these becomings and is their true Self and conscious Spirit, and
not to know it only intellectually but to know by a self-experience that shall compel into its own diviner mould all
the habits of the mental consciousness.
\par This Self that we are has finally to become to our self-consciousness entirely one with all existences in spite
of its exceeding them. We have to see it not only as that which contains and inhabits all, but that which is all, not
only as indwelling spirit, but also as the name and form, the movement and the master of the movement, the mind
and life and body. It is by this final realisation that we shall resume entirely in the right poise and the vision of the
Truth all that we drew back from in the first movement of recoil and withdrawal. The individual mind, life and
body which we recoiled from as not our true being, we shall recover as a true becoming of the Self, but no longer
in a purely individual narrowness. We shall take up the mind not as a separate mentality imprisoned in a petty
motion, but
Page 372

as a large movement of the universal mind, the life not as an egoistic activity of vitality and sensation and desire,
but as a free movement of the universal life, the body not as a physical prison of the soul but as a subordinate
instrument and detachable robe, realising that also as a movement of universal Matter, a cell of the cosmic Body.
We shall come to feel all the consciousness of the physical world as one with our physical consciousness, feel all
the energies of the cosmic life around as our own energies, feel all the heart-beats of the great cosmic impulse
and seeking in our heart-beats set to the rhythm of the divine Ananda, feel all the action of the universal mind
flowing into our mentality and our thought-action flowing out upon it as a wave into that wide sea. This unity
embracing all mind, life and matter in the light of a supramental Truth and the pulse of a spiritual Bliss will be to
us our internal fulfilment of the Divine in a complete cosmic consciousness.
\par But since we must embrace all this in the double term of the Being and the Becoming, the knowledge that
we shall possess must be complete and integral. It must not stop with the realisation of the pure Self and Spirit,
but include also all those modes of the Spirit by which it supports, develops and throws itself out into its cosmic
manifestation. Self-knowledge and world-knowledge must be made one in the all-ensphering knowledge of the
Brahman.
Page 373

\par
\hn Chapter XI
\par
\ht The Modes of the Self
\par\drop Since the Self which we come to realise by the path of knowledge is not only the reality which lies
behind and supports the states and movements of our psychological being, but also that transcendent and
universal Existence which has manifested itself in all the movements of the universal, the knowledge of the Self
includes also the knowledge of the principles of Being, its fundamental modes and its relations with the principles
of the phenomenal universe. This was what was meant by the Upanishad when it spoke of the Brahman as that
which being known all is known.
\note{\s{yasmin vij\~n\=ate sarva\.m vij\~n\=atam}.} It has to be realised first as the pure principle of Existence,
afterwards, says the Upanishad, its essential modes become clear to the soul which realises it. We may indeed,
before realisation, try to analyse by the metaphysical reason and even understand intellectually what Being is and
what the world is, but such metaphysical understanding is not the Knowledge. Moreover, we may have the
realisation in knowledge and vision, but this is incomplete without realisation in the entire soul-experience and the
unity of all our being with that which we realise.
\lnote{This is the distinction made in the Gita between Sankhya and Yoga; both are necessary to an integral
knowledge.} It is the science of Yoga to know and the art of Yoga to be unified with the Highest so that we may
live in the Self and act from that supreme poise, becoming one not only in the conscious essence but in the
conscious law of our being with the transcendent Divine whom all things and creatures, whether ignorantly or
with partial knowledge and experience, seek to express through the lower law of their members. To know the
highest Truth and to be in harmony with it is the condition of right being, to express it in
Page 374

all that we are, experience and do is the condition of right living.
\par But rightly to know and express the Highest is not easy for man the mental being because the highest Truth
and therefore the highest modes of existence are supramental. They repose on the essential unity of what seem
to the intellect and mind and are to our mental experience of the world opposite poles of existence and idea and
therefore irreconcilable opposites and contradictions, but to the supramental experience are complementary
aspects of the same Truth. We have seen this already in the necessity of realising the Self as at once one and
many; for we have to realise each thing and being as That; we have to realise the unity of all as That, both in the
unity of sum and in the oneness of essence; and we have to realise That as the Transcendent who is beyond all
this unity and this multiplicity which we see everywhere as the two opposite, yet companion poles of all
existence. For every individual being is the Self, the Divine in spite of the outward limitations of the mental and
physical form through which it presents itself at the actual moment, in the actual field of space, in the actual
succession of circumstances that make up the web of inner state and outward action and event through which
we know the individual. So, equally, every collectivity small or great is each the Self, the Divine similarly
expressing itself in the conditions of this manifestation. We cannot really know any individual or any collectivity if
we know it only as it appears inwardly to itself or outwardly to us, but only if we know it as the Divine, the One,
our own Self employing its various essential modes and its occasional circumstances of self-manifestation. Until
we have transformed the habits of our mentality so that it shall live entirely in this knowledge reconciling all
differences in the One, we do not live in the real Truth, because we do not live in the real Unity. The
accomplished sense of Unity is not that in which all are regarded as parts of one whole, waves of one sea, but
that in which each as well as the All is regarded wholly as the Divine, wholly as our Self in a supreme identity.
\par And yet, so complex is the Maya of the Infinite, there is a sense in which the view of all as parts of the
whole, waves of the sea or even as in a sense separate entities becomes a
Page 375

necessary part of the integral Truth and the integral Knowledge. For if the Self is always one in all, yet we see
that for the purposes at least of the cyclic manifestation it expresses itself in perpetual soul-forms which preside
over the movements of our personality through the worlds and the aeons. This persistent soul-existence is the
real Individuality which stands behind the constant mutations of the thing we call our personality. It is not a
limited ego but a thing in itself infinite; it is in truth the Infinite itself consenting from one plane of its being to
reflect itself in a perpetual soul-experience. This is the truth which underlies the Sankhya theory of many
Purushas, many essential, infinite, free and impersonal souls reflecting the movements of a single cosmic energy.
It stands also, in a different way, behind the very different philosophy of qualified Monism which arose as a
protest against the metaphysical excesses of Buddhistic Nihilism and illusionist Adwaita. The old
semi-Buddhistic, semi-Sankhya theory which saw only the Quiescent and nothing else in the world except a
constant combination of the five elements and the three modes of inconscient Energy lighting up their false
activity by the consciousness of the Quiescent in which it is reflected, is not the whole truth of the Brahman. We
are not a mere mass of changing mind-stuff, life-stuff, body-stuff taking different forms of mind and life and
body from birth to birth, so that at no time is there any real self or conscious reason of existence behind all the
flux or none except that Quiescent who cares for none of these things. There is a real and stable power of our
being behind the constant mutation of our mental, vital and physical personality, and this we have to know and
preserve in order that the Infinite may manifest Himself through it according to His will in whatever range and
for whatever purpose of His eternal cosmic activity.
\par And if we regard existence from the standpoint of the possible eternal and infinite relations of this One from
whom all things proceed, these Many of whom the One is the essence and the origin and this Energy, Power, or
Nature through which the relations of the One and the Many are maintained, we shall see a certain justification
even for the dualist philosophies and
Page 376

religions which seem to deny most energetically the unity of beings and to make an unbridgeable differentiation
between the Lord and His creatures. If in their grosser forms these religions aim only at the ignorant joys of the
lower heavens, yet there is a far higher and profounder sense in which we may appreciate the cry of the devotee
poet when in a homely and vigorous metaphor he claimed the right of the soul to enjoy for ever the ecstasy of its
embrace of the Supreme. “I do not want to become sugar,” he wrote, “I want to eat sugar.” However strongly
we may found ourselves on the essential identity of the one Self in all, we need not regard that cry as the mere
aspiration of a certain kind of spiritual sensuousness or the rejection by an attached and ignorant soul of the pure
and high austerity of the supreme Truth. On the contrary, it aims in its positive part at a deep and mysterious
truth of Being which no human language can utter, of which human reason can give no adequate account, to
which the heart has the key and which no pride of the soul of knowledge insisting on its own pure austerity can
abolish. But that belongs properly to the summit of the path of Devotion and there we shall have again to return
to it.
\par The sadhaka of an integral Yoga will take an integral view of his goal and seek its integral realisation. The
Divine has many essential modes of His eternal self-manifestation, possesses and finds Himself on many planes
and through many poles of His being; to each mode its purpose, to each plane or pole its fulfilment both in the
apex and the supreme scope of the eternal Unity. It is necessarily through the individual Self that we must arrive
at the One, for that is the basis of all our experience. By Knowledge we arrive at identity with the One; for there
is, in spite of the Dualist, an essential identity by which we can plunge into our Source and free ourselves from all
bondage to individuality and even from all bondage to universality. Nor is the experience of that identity a gain for
knowledge only or for the pure state of abstract being. The height of all our action also, we have seen, is the
immersion of ourselves in the Lord through unity with the divine Will or Conscious-Power by the way of works;
the height of love is the rapturous immersion of ourselves in unity
Page 377

of ecstatic delight with the object of our love and adoration. But again for divine works in the world the individual
Self converts itself into a centre of consciousness through which the divine Will, one with the divine Love and
Light, pours itself out in the multiplicity of the universe. We arrive in the same way at our unity with all our
fellow-beings through the identity of this self with the Supreme and with the self in all others. At the same time in
the action of Nature we preserve by it as soul-form of the One a differentiation which enables us to preserve
relations of difference in Oneness with other beings and with the Supreme Himself. The relations will necessarily
be very different in essence and spirit from those which we had when we lived entirely in the Ignorance and
Oneness was a mere name or a struggling aspiration of imperfect love, sympathy or yearning. Unity will be the
law, difference will be simply for the various enjoyment of that unity. Neither descending again into that plane of
division which clings to the separation of the ego-sense nor attached to an exclusive seeking for pure identity
which cannot have to do with any play of difference, we shall embrace and reconcile the two poles of being
where they meet in the infinity of the Highest.
\par The Self, even the individual self, is different from our personality as it is different from our mental
ego-sense. Our personality is never the same; it is a constant mutation and various combination. It is not a basic
consciousness, but a development of forms of consciousness,—not a power of being, but a various play of partial
powers of being,—not the enjoyer of the self-delight of our existence, but a seeking after various notes and tones
of experience which shall more or less render that delight in the mutability of relations. This also is Purusha and
Brahman, but it is the mutable Purusha, the phenomenon of the Eternal, not its stable reality. The Gita makes a
distinction between three Purushas who constitute the whole state and action of the divine Being, the Mutable,
the Immutable and the Highest which is beyond and embraces the other two. That Highest is the Lord in whom
we have to live, the supreme Self in us and in all. The Immutable is the silent, actionless, equal, unchanging self
which
Page 378

we reach when we draw back from activity to passivity, from the play of consciousness and force and the
seeking of delight to the pure and constant basis of consciousness and force and delight through which the
Highest, free, secure and unattached, possesses and enjoys the play. The Mutable is the substance and
immediate motive of that changing flux of personality through which the relations of our cosmic life are made
possible. The mental being fixed in the Mutable moves in its flux and has not possession of an eternal peace and
power and self-delight; the soul fixed in the Immutable holds all these in itself but cannot act in the world; but the
soul that can live in the Highest enjoys the eternal peace and power and delight and wideness of being, is not
bound in its self-knowledge and self-power by character and personality or by forms of its force and habits of its
consciousness and yet uses them all with a large freedom and power for the self-expression of the Divine in the
world. Here again the change is not any alteration of the essential modes of the Self, but consists in our
emergence into the freedom of the Highest and the right use of the divine law of our being.
\par Connected with this triple mode of the Self is that distinction which Indian philosophy has drawn between
the Qualitied and the Qualitiless Brahman and European thought has made between the Personal and the
Impersonal God. The Upanishad indicates clearly enough the relative nature of this opposition, when it speaks of
the Supreme as the “Qualitied who is without qualities”.
\note{\s{nirgu\,no gu\,n\=i}.} We have again two essential modes, two fundamental aspects, two poles of eternal
being, both of them exceeded in the transcendent divine Reality. They correspond practically to the Silent and the
Active Brahman. For the whole action of the universe may be regarded from a certain point of view as the
expression and shaping out in various ways of the numberless and infinite qualities of the Brahman. His being
assumes by conscious Will all kinds of properties, shapings of the stuff of conscious being, habits as it were of
cosmic character and power of dynamic self-consciousness, \sforced{gu\,nas}, into which all the
Page 379

cosmic action can be resolved. But by none of these nor by all of them nor by their utmost infinite potentiality is
He bound; He is above all His qualities and on a certain plane of being rests free from them. The Nirguna or
Unqualitied is not incapable of qualities, rather it is this very Nirguna or No-Quality who manifests Himself as
Saguna, as Ananta-guna, infinite quality, since He contains all in His absolute capacity of boundlessly varied
self-revelation. He is free from them in the sense of exceeding them; and indeed if He were not free from them
they could not be infinite; God would be subject to His qualities, bound by His nature, Prakriti would be supreme
and Purusha its creation and plaything. The Eternal is bound neither by quality nor absence of quality, neither by
Personality nor by Impersonality; He is Himself, beyond all our positive and all our negative definitions.
\par But if we cannot define the Eternal, we can unify ourselves with it. It has been said that we can become the
Impersonal, but not the personal God, but this is only true in the sense that no one can become individually the
Lord of all the universes; we {\it can} free ourselves into the existence of the active Brahman as well as that of
the Silence; we can live in both, go back to our being in both, but each in its proper way, by becoming one with
the Nirguna in our essence and one with the Saguna in the liberty of our active being, in our nature.
\note{\s{s\=adharmya-mukti}.} The Supreme pours Himself out of an eternal peace, poise and silence into an
eternal activity, free and infinite, freely fixing for itself its self-determinations, using infinite quality to shape out of
it varied combination of quality. We have to go back to that peace, poise and silence and act out of it with the
divine freedom from the bondage of qualities but still using qualities even the most opposite largely and flexibly
for the divine work in the world. Only, while the Lord acts out of the centre of all things, we have to act by
transmission of His will and power and self-knowledge through the individual centre, the soul-form of Him which
we are. The Lord is subject to nothing; the individual soul-form is subject to its own highest
Page 380

Self and the greater and more absolute is that subjection, the greater becomes its sense of absolute force and
freedom.
\par The distinction between the Personal and the Impersonal is substantially the same as the Indian distinction,
but the associations of the English words carry within them a certain limitation which is foreign to Indian thought.
The personal God of the European religions is a Person in the human sense of the word, limited by His qualities
though otherwise possessed of omnipotence and omniscience; it answers to the Indian special conceptions of
Shiva or Vishnu or Brahma or of the Divine Mother of all, Durga or Kali. Each religion really erects a different
personal Deity according to its own heart and thought to adore and serve. The fierce and inexorable God of
Calvin is a different being from the sweet and loving God of St. Francis, as the gracious Vishnu is different from
the terrible though always loving and beneficent Kali who has pity even in her slaying and saves by her
destructions. Shiva, the God of ascetic renunciation who destroys all things seems to be a different being from
Vishnu and Brahma, who act by grace, love, preservation of the creature or for life and creation. It is obvious
that such conceptions can be only in a very partial and relative sense true descriptions of the infinite and
omnipresent Creator and Ruler of the universe. Nor does Indian religious thought affirm them as adequate
descriptions. The Personal God is not limited by His qualities, He is Ananta-guna, capable of infinite qualities and
beyond them and lord of them to use them as He will, and He manifests Himself in various names and forms of
His infinite godhead to satisfy the desire and need of the individual soul according to its own nature and
personality. It is for this reason that the normal European mind finds it so difficult to understand Indian religion as
distinct from Vedantic or Sankhya philosophy, because it cannot easily conceive of a personal God with infinite
qualities, a personal God who is not a Person, but the sole real Person and the source of all personality. Yet that
is the only valid and complete truth of the divine Personality.
\par The place of the divine Personality in our synthesis will best be considered when we come to speak of the
Yoga of devotion;
Page 381

it is enough here to indicate that it has its place and keeps it in the integral Yoga even when liberation has been
attained. There are practically three grades of the approach to the personal Deity; the first in which He is
conceived with a particular form or particular qualities as the name and form of the Godhead which our nature
and personality prefers;
\note{\s{i\,s\,ta-devat\=a}.} a second in which He is the one real Person, the All-Personality, the Ananta-guna; a
third in which we get back to the ultimate source of all idea and fact of personality in that which the Upanishad
indicates by the single word {\it He} without fixing any attributes. It is there that our realisations of the personal
and the impersonal Divine meet and become one in the utter Godhead. For the impersonal Divine is not ultimately
an abstraction or a mere principle or a mere state or power and degree of being any more than we ourselves are
really such abstractions. The intellect first approaches it through such conceptions, but realisation ends by
exceeding them. Through the realisation of higher and higher principles of being and states of conscious
existence we arrive not at the annullation of all in a sort of positive zero or even an inexpressible state of
existence, but at the transcendent Existence itself which is also the Existent who transcends all definition by
personality and yet is always that which is the essence of personality.
\par When in That we live and have our being, we can possess it in both its modes, the Impersonal in a supreme
state of being and consciousness, in an infinite impersonality of self-possessing power and bliss, the Personal by
the divine nature acting through the individual soul-form and by the relation between that and its transcendent and
universal Self. We may keep even our relation with the personal Deity in His forms and names; if, for instance,
our work is predominantly a work of Love it is as the Lord of Love that we can seek to serve and express Him,
but we shall have at the same time an integral realisation of Him in all His names and forms and qualities and not
mistake the front of Him which is prominent in our attitude to the world for all the infinite Godhead.
Page 382

\par
\hn Chapter XII
\par
\ht The Realisation of Sachchidananda
\par\drop The modes of the Self which we have dealt with in our last Chapter may seem at first to be of a highly
metaphysical character, to be intellectual conceptions more fit for philosophical analysis than for practical
realisation. But this is a false distinction made by the division of our faculties. It is at least a fundamental principle
of the ancient wisdom, the wisdom of the East on which we are founding ourselves, that philosophy ought not to
be merely a lofty intellectual pastime or a play of dialectical subtlety or even a pursuit of metaphysical truth for
its own sake, but a discovery by all right means of the basic truths of all-existence which ought then to become
the guiding principles of our own existence. Sankhya, the abstract and analytical realisation of truth, is one side of
Knowledge. Yoga, the concrete and synthetic realisation of it in our experience, inner state, outer life is the
other. Both are means by which man can escape out of falsehood and ignorance and live in and by the truth.
And since it is always the highest he can know or be capable of that must be the aim of the thinking man, it is the
highest truth which the soul must seek out by thought and by life accomplish.
\par Here lies the whole importance of the part of the Yoga of Knowledge which we are now considering, the
knowledge
\note{\s{tattvaj\~n\=ana}.} of those essential principles of Being, those essential modes of self-existence on which
the absolute Divine has based its self-manifestation. If the truth of our being is an infinite unity in which alone
there is perfect wideness, light, knowledge, power, bliss, and if all our subjection to darkness, ignorance,
weakness, sorrow, limitation comes of our viewing existence as a clash of infinitely multiple separate existences,
then obviously it is the
Page 383

most practical and concrete and utilitarian as well as the most lofty and philosophical wisdom to find a means by
which we can get away from the error and learn to live in the truth. So also, if that One is in its nature a freedom
from bondage to this play of qualities which constitute our psychology and if from subjection to that play are born
the struggle and discord in which we live, floundering eternally between the two poles of good and evil, virtue and
sin, satisfaction and failure, joy and grief, pleasure and pain, then to get beyond the qualities and take our
foundation in the settled peace of that which is always beyond them is the only practical wisdom. If attachment
to mutable personality is the cause of our self-ignorance, of our discord and quarrel with ourself and with life and
with others, and if there is an impersonal One in which no such discord and ignorance and vain and noisy effort
exist because it is in eternal identity and harmony with itself, then to arrive in our souls at that impersonality and
untroubled oneness of being is the one line and object of human effort to which our reason can consent to give
the name of practicality.
\par There is such a unity, impersonality, freedom from the play of qualities which lifts us above the strife and
surge of Nature in her eternal seeking through mind and body for the true key and secret of all her relations. And
it is the ancient highest experience of mankind that only by arriving there, only by making oneself impersonal,
one, still, self-gathered, superior to the mental and vital existence in that which is eternally superior to it, can a
settled, because self-existent peace and internal freedom be acquired. Therefore this is the first, in a sense the
characteristic and essential object of the Yoga of Knowledge. But, as we have insisted, this, if first, is not all; if
the essential, it is not the complete object. Knowledge is not complete if it merely shows us how to get away
from relations to that which is beyond relations, from personality to impersonality, from multiplicity to featureless
unity. It must give us also that key, that secret of the whole play of relations, the whole variation of multiplicity,
the whole clash and interaction of personalities for which cosmic existence is seeking. And knowledge is still
incomplete if it gives
Page 384

us only an idea and cannot verify it in experience; we seek the key, the secret in order that we may govern the
phenomenon by the reality it represents, heal its discords by the hidden principle of concord and unification
behind them and arrive from the converging and diverging effort of the world to the harmony of its fulfilment.
Not merely peace, but fulfilment is what the heart of the world is seeking and what a perfect and effective
self-knowledge must give to it; peace can only be the eternal support, the infinite condition, the natural
atmosphere of self-fulfilment.
\par Moreover, the knowledge that finds the true secret of multiplicity, personality, quality, play of relations, must
show us some real oneness in essence of being and intimate unity in power of being between the impersonal and
the source of personality, the qualitiless and that which expresses itself in qualities, the unity of existence and its
many-featured multiplicity. The knowledge that leaves a yawning gulf between the two, can be no ultimate
knowledge, however logical it may seem to the analytical intellect or however satisfactory to a self-dividing
experience. True knowledge must arrive at a oneness which embraces even though it exceeds the totality of
things, not at a oneness which is incapable of it and rejects it. For there can be no such original unbridgeable
chasm of duality either in the All-existence itself or between any transcendent Oneness and the All-existent. And
as in knowledge, so in experience and self-fulfilment. The experience which finds at the summit of things such an
original unbridgeable chasm between two contrary principles and can at most succeed in overleaping it so that it
has to live in one or the other, but cannot embrace and unify, is not the ultimate experience. Whether we seek to
know by thought or by the vision of knowledge which surpasses thought or by that perfect self-experience in our
own being which is the crown and fulfilment of realisation by knowledge, we must be able to think out, see,
experience and live the all-satisfying unity. This is what we find in the conception, vision and experience of the
One whose oneness does not cease or disappear from view by self-expression in the Many, who is free from
bondage to qualities but is yet infinite quality, who contains and combines all relations, yet is ever
Page 385

absolute, who is no one person and yet all persons because He is all being and the one conscious Being. For the
individual centre we call ourselves, to enter by its consciousness into this Divine and reproduce its nature in itself
is the high and marvellous, yet perfectly rational and most supremely pragmatic and utilitarian goal before us. It is
the fulfilment of our self-existence and at the same time the fulfilment of our cosmic existence, of the individual
in himself and of the individual in his relation to the cosmic Many. Between these two terms there is no
irreconcilable opposition: rather, our own self and the self of the cosmos having been discovered to be one, there
must be between them an intimate unity.
\par In fact all these opposite terms are merely general conditions for the manifestation of conscious being in that
Transcendent who is always one not only behind, but within all conditions however apparently opposite. And the
original unifying spirit-stuff of them all and the one substantial mode of them all is that which has been described
for the convenience of our thought as the trinity of Sachchidananda. Existence, Consciousness, Bliss, these are
everywhere the three inseparable divine terms. None of them is really separate, though our mind and our mental
experience can make not only the distinction, but the separation. Mind can say and think “I was, but
unconscious”—for no being can say “I am, but unconscious”—and it can think and feel “I am, but miserable and
without any pleasure in existence.” In reality this is impossible. The existence we really are, the eternal “I am”,
of which it can never be true to say “It was”, is nowhere and at no time unconscious. What we call
unconsciousness is simply other-consciousness; it is the going in of this surface wave of our mental awareness of
outer objects into our subliminal self-awareness and into our awareness too of other planes of existence. We are
really no more unconscious when we are asleep or stunned or drugged or “dead” or in any other state, than
when we are plunged in inner thought oblivious of our physical selves and our surroundings. For anyone who has
advanced even a little way in Yoga, this is a most elementary proposition and one which offers no difficulty
whatever to the thought because it is
Page 386

proved at every point by experience. It is more difficult to realise that existence and undelight of existence
cannot go together. What we call misery, grief, pain, absence of delight is again merely a surface wave of the
delight of existence which takes on to our mental experience these apparently opposite tints because of a certain
trick of false reception in our divided being—which is not our existence at all but only a fragmentary formulation
or discoloured spray of conscious-force tossed up by the infinite sea of our self-existence. In order to realise this
we have to get away from our absorption in these surface habits, these petty tricks of our mental being,—and
when we do get behind and away from them it is surprising how superficial they are, what ridiculously weak and
little-penetrating pin-pricks they prove to be,—and we have to realise true existence, and true consciousness, and
true experience of existence and consciousness, Sat, Chit and Ananda.
\par Chit, the divine Consciousness, is not our mental self-awareness; that we shall find to be only a form, a
lower and limited mode or movement. As we progress and awaken to the soul in us and things, we shall realise
that there is a consciousness also in the plant, in the metal, in the atom, in electricity, in everything that belongs to
physical nature; we shall find even that it is not really in all respects a lower or more limited mode than the
mental, on the contrary it is in many “inanimate” forms more intense, rapid, poignant, though less evolved
towards the surface. But this also, this consciousness of vital and physical Nature is, compared with Chit, a lower
and therefore a limited form, mode and movement. These lower modes of consciousness are the conscious-stuff
of inferior planes in one indivisible existence. In ourselves also there is in our subconscious being an action which
is precisely that of the “inanimate” physical Nature whence has been constituted the basis of our physical being,
another which is that of plant-life, and another which is that of the lower animal creation around us. All these are
so much dominated and conditioned by the thinking and reasoning conscious-being in us that we have no real
awareness of these lower planes; we are unable to
Page 387

perceive in their own terms what these parts of us are doing, and receive it very imperfectly in the terms and
values of the thinking and reasoning mind. Still we know well enough that there is an animal in us as well as that
which is characteristically human,—something which is a creature of conscious instinct and impulse, not
reflective or rational, as well as that which turns back in thought and will on its experience, meets it from above
with the light and force of a higher plane and to some degree controls, uses and modifies it. But the animal in
man is only the head of our subhuman being; below it there is much that is also sub-animal and merely vital,
much that acts by an instinct and impulse of which the constituting consciousness is withdrawn behind the
surface. Below this sub-animal being, there is at a further depth the subvital. When we advance in that
ultra-normal self-knowledge and experience which Yoga brings with it, we become aware that the body too has
a consciousness of its own; it has habits, impulses, instincts, an inert yet effective will which differs from that of
the rest of our being and can resist it and condition its effectiveness. Much of the struggle in our being is due to
this composite existence and the interaction of these varied and heterogeneous planes on each other. For man
here is the result of an evolution and contains in himself the whole of that evolution up from the merely physical
and subvital conscious being to the mental creature which at the top he is.
\par But this evolution is really a manifestation and just as we have in us these subnormal selves and subhuman
planes, so are there in us above our mental being supernormal and superhuman planes. There Chit as the
universal conscious-stuff of existence takes other poises, moves out in other modes, on other principles and by
other faculties of action. There is above the mind, as the old Vedic sages discovered, a Truth-plane, a plane of
self-luminous, self-effective Idea, which can be turned in light and force upon our mind, reason, sentiments,
impulses, sensations and use and control them in the sense of the real Truth of things just as we turn our mental
reason and will upon our sense-experience and animal nature to use and control them in the sense of our rational
and moral perceptions. There
Page 388

there is no seeking, but rather natural possession; no conflict or separation between will and reason, instinct and
impulse, desire and experience, idea and reality, but all are in harmony, concomitant, mutually effective, unified in
their origin, in their development and in their effectuation. But beyond this plane and attainable through it are
others in which the very Chit itself becomes revealed, Chit the elemental origin and primal completeness of all
this varied consciousness which is here used for various formation and experience. There will and knowledge
and sensation and all the rest of our faculties, powers, modes of experience are not merely harmonious,
concomitant, unified, but are one being of consciousness and power of consciousness. It is this Chit which
modifies itself so as to become on the Truth-plane the supermind, on the mental plane the mental reason, will,
emotion, sensation, on the lower planes the vital or physical instincts, impulses, habits of an obscure force not in
superficially conscious possession of itself. All is Chit because all is Sat; all is various movement of the original
Consciousness because all is various movement of the original Being.
\par When we find, see or know Chit, we find also that its essence is Ananda or delight of self-existence. To
possess self is to possess self-bliss; not to possess self is to be in more or less obscure search of the delight of
existence. Chit eternally possesses its self-bliss; and since Chit is the universal conscious-stuff of being,
conscious universal being is also in possession of conscious self-bliss, master of the universal delight of existence.
The Divine whether it manifests itself in All-Quality or in No-Quality, in Personality or Impersonality, in the One
absorbing the Many or in the One manifesting its essential multiplicity, is always in possession of self-bliss and
all-bliss because it is always Sachchidananda. For us also to know and possess our true Self in the essential and
the universal is to discover the essential and the universal delight of existence, self-bliss and all-bliss. For the
universal is only the pouring out of the essential existence, consciousness and delight; and wherever and in
whatever form that manifests as existence, there the essential consciousness must be and therefore there must
be an essential delight.
Page 389

\par The individual soul does not possess this true nature of itself or realise this true nature of its experience,
because it separates itself both from the essential and the universal and identifies itself with the separate
accidents, with the unessential form and mode and with the separate aspect and vehicle. Thus it takes its mind,
body, life-stream for its essential self. It tries to assert these for their own sake against the universal, against that
of which the universal is the manifestation. It is right in trying to assert and fulfil itself in the universal for the
sake of something greater and beyond, but wrong in attempting to do so against the universal and in obedience to
a fragmentary aspect of the universal. This fragmentary aspect or rather collection of fragmentary experiences it
combines around an artificial centre of mental experience, the mental ego, and calls that itself and it serves this
ego and lives for its sake instead of living for the sake of that something greater and beyond of which all aspects,
even the widest and most general are partial manifestations. This is the living in the false and not the true self;
this is living for the sake of and in obedience to the ego and not for the sake of and in obedience to the Divine.
The question how this fall has come about and for what purpose it has been done, belongs to the domain of
Sankhya rather than of Yoga. We have to seize on the practical fact that to such self-division is due the
self-limitation by which we have become unable to possess the true nature of being and experience and are
therefore in our mind, life and body subject to ignorance, incapacity and suffering. Non-possession of unity is the
root cause; to recover unity is the sovereign means, unity with the universal and with that which the universal is
here to express. We have to realise the true self of ourselves and of all; and to realise the true self is to realise
Sachchidananda.
Page 390

\par
\hn Chapter XIII
\par
\ht The Difficulties of the Mental Being
\par\drop We have come to this stage in our development of the path of Knowledge that we began by affirming
the realisation of our pure self, pure existence above the terms of mind, life and body, as the first object of this
Yoga, but we now affirm that this is not sufficient and that we must also realise the Self or Brahman in its
essential modes and primarily in its triune reality as Sachchidananda. Not only pure existence, but pure
consciousness and pure bliss of its being and consciousness are the reality of the Self and the essence of
Brahman.
\par Further, there are two kinds of realisation of Self or Sachchidananda. One is that of the silent passive
quietistic, self-absorbed, self-sufficient existence, consciousness and delight, one, impersonal, without play of
qualities, turned away from the infinite phenomenon of the universe or viewing it with indifference and without
participation. The other is that of the same existence, consciousness, delight sovereign, free, lord of things, acting
out of an inalienable calm, pouring itself out in infinite action and quality out of an eternal self-concentration, the
one supreme Person holding in himself all this play of personality in a vast equal impersonality, possessing the
infinite phenomenon of the universe without attachment but without any inseparable aloofness, with a divine
mastery and an innumerable radiation of his eternal luminous self-delight—as a manifestation which he holds, but
by which he is not held, which he governs freely and by which therefore he is not bound. This is not the personal
God of the religious or the qualified Brahman of the philosophers, but that in which personal and impersonal,
quality and non-quality are reconciled. It is the Transcendent possessing them both in His being and employing
them both as modes for His manifestation. This then is the object of realisation for the sadhaka of the integral
Yoga.
Page 391

\par We see at once that from this point of view the realisation of the pure quiescent self which we gain by
withdrawing from mind, life and body, is for us only the acquisition of the necessary basis for this greater
realisation. Therefore that process is not sufficient for our Yoga; something else is needed more embracingly
positive. As we drew back from all that constitutes our apparent self and the phenomenon of the universe in
which it dwells to the self-existent, self-conscious Brahman, so we must now repossess our mind, life and body
with the all-embracing self-existence, self-consciousness and self-delight of the Brahman. We must not only
have the possession of a pure self-existence independent of the world-play, but possess all existence as our own;
not only know ourselves as an infinite unegoistic consciousness beyond all change in Time and Space, but
become one with all the outpouring of consciousness and its creative force in Time and Space; not only be
capable of a fathomless peace and quiescence, but also of a free and an infinite delight in universal things. For
that and not only pure calm is Sachchidananda, is the Brahman.
\par If it were easily possible to elevate ourselves to the supramental plane and, dwelling securely there, realise
world and being, consciousness and action, outgoing and incoming of conscious experience by the power and in
the manner of the divine supramental faculties, this realisation would offer no essential difficulties. But man is a
mental and not yet a supramental being. It is by the mind therefore that he has to aim at knowledge and realise
his being, with whatever help he can get from the supramental planes. This character of our actually realised
being and therefore of our Yoga imposes on us certain limitations and primary difficulties which can only be
overcome by divine help or an arduous practice, and in reality only by the combination of both these aids. These
difficulties in the way of the integral knowledge, the integral realisation, the integral becoming we have to state
succinctly before we can proceed farther.
\par Realised mental being and realised spiritual being are really two different planes in the arrangement of our
existence, the one superior and divine, the other inferior and human. To
Page 392

the former belong infinite being, infinite consciousness and will, infinite bliss and the infinite comprehensive and
self-effective knowledge of supermind, four divine principles; to the latter belong mental being, vital being,
physical being, three human principles. In their apparent nature the two are opposed; each is the reverse of the
other. The divine is infinite and immortal being; the human is life limited in time and scope and form, life that is
death attempting to become life that is immortality. The divine is infinite consciousness transcending and
embracing all that it manifests within it; the human is consciousness rescued from a sleep of inconscience,
subjected to the means it uses, limited by body and ego and attempting to find its relation to other
consciousnesses, bodies, egos positively by various means of uniting contact and sympathy, negatively by various
means of hostile contact and antipathy. The divine is inalienable self-bliss and inviolable all-bliss; the human is
sensation of mind and body seeking for delight, but finding only pleasure, indifference and pain. The divine is
supramental knowledge comprehending all and supramental will effecting all; the human is ignorance reaching
out to knowledge by the comprehension of things in parts and parcels which it has to join clumsily together, and it
is incapacity attempting to acquire force and will through a gradual extension of power corresponding to its
gradual extension of knowledge; and this extension it can only bring about by a partial and parcelled exercise of
will corresponding to the partial and parcelled method of its knowledge. The divine founds itself upon unity and is
master of the transcendences and totalities of things; the human founds itself on separated multiplicity and is the
subject even when the master of their division and fragmentations and their difficult solderings and unifyings.
Between the two there are for the human being a veil and a lid which prevent the human not only from attaining
but even from knowing the divine.
\par When, therefore, the mental being seeks to know the divine, to realise it, to become it, it has first to lift this
lid, to put by this veil. But when it succeeds in that difficult endeavour, it sees the divine as something superior to
it, distant, high, conceptually,
Page 393

vitally, even physically above it, to which it looks up from its own humble station and to which it has, if at all that
be possible, to rise, or if it be not possible, to call that down to itself, to be subject to it and to adore. It sees the
divine as a superior plane of being, and then it regards it as a supreme state of existence, a heaven or a Sat or a
Nirvana according to the nature of its own conception or realisation. Or it sees it as a supreme Being other than
itself or at least other than its own present self, and then it calls it God under one name or another, and views it
as personal or impersonal, qualitied or without qualities, silent and indifferent Power or active Lord and Helper,
again according to its own conception or realisation, its vision or understanding of some side or some aspect of
that Being. Or it sees it as a supreme Reality of which its own imperfect being is a reflection or from which it
has become detached, and then it calls it Self or Brahman and qualifies it variously, always according to its own
conception or realisation,—Existence, Non-Existence, Tao, Nihil, Force, Unknowable.
\par If then we seek mentally to realise Sachchidananda, there is likely to be this first difficulty that we shall see
it as something above, beyond, around even in a sense, but with a gulf between that being and our being, an
unbridged or even an unbridgeable chasm. There is this infinite existence; but it is quite other than the mental
being who becomes aware of it, and we cannot either raise ourselves to it and become it or bring it down to
ourselves so that our own experience of our being and world-being shall be that of its blissful infinity. There is
this great, boundless, unconditioned consciousness and force; but our consciousness and force stands apart from
it, even if within it, limited, petty, discouraged, disgusted with itself and the world, but unable to participate in that
higher thing which it has seen. There is this immeasurable and unstained bliss; but our own being remains the
sport of a lower Nature of pleasure and pain and dull neutral sensation incapable of its divine delight. There is
this perfect Knowledge and Will; but our own remains always the mental deformed knowledge and limping will
incapable of sharing in or even being in tune with that nature of Godhead. Or else so long
Page 394

as we live purely in an ecstatic contemplation of that vision, we are delivered from ourselves; but the moment we
again turn our consciousness upon our own being, we fall away from it and it disappears or becomes remote and
intangible. The Divinity leaves us; the Vision vanishes; we are back again in the pettiness of our mortal
existence.
\par Somehow this chasm has to be bridged. And here there are two possibilities for the mental being. One
possibility is for it to rise by a great, prolonged, concentrated, all-forgetting effort out of itself into the Supreme.
But in this effort the mind has to leave its own consciousness, to disappear into another and temporarily or
permanently lose itself, if not quite abolish. It has to go into the trance of Samadhi. For this reason the Raja and
other systems of Yoga give a supreme importance to the state of Samadhi or Yogic trance in which the mind
withdraws not only from its ordinary interests and preoccupations, but first from all consciousness of outward act
and sense and being and then from all consciousness of inward mental activities. In this its inward-gathered state
the mental being may have different kinds of realisation of the Supreme in itself or in various aspects or on
various levels, but the ideal is to get rid of mind altogether and, going beyond mental realisation, to enter into the
absolute trance in which all sign of mind or lower existence ceases. But this is a state of consciousness to which
few can attain and from which not all can return.
\par It is obvious, since mind-consciousness is the sole waking state possessed by mental being, that it cannot
ordinarily quite enter into another without leaving behind completely both all our waking existence and all our
inward mind. This is the necessity of the Yogic trance. But one cannot continually remain in this trance; or, even
if one could persist in it for an indefinitely long period, it is always likely to be broken in upon by any strong or
persistent call on the bodily life. And when one returns to the mental consciousness, one is back again in the
lower being. Therefore it has been said that complete liberation from the human birth, complete ascension from
the life of the mental being is impossible until the body and the bodily life are
Page 395

finally cast off. The ideal upheld before the Yogin who follows this method is to renounce all desire and every
least velleity of the human life, of the mental existence, to detach himself utterly from the world and, entering
more and more frequently and more and more deeply into the most concentrated state of Samadhi, finally to
leave the body while in that utter in-gathering of the being so that it may depart into the supreme Existence. It is
also by reason of this apparent incompatibility of mind and Spirit that so many religions and systems are led to
condemn the world and look forward only to a heaven beyond or else a void Nirvana or supreme featureless
self-existence in the Supreme.
\par But what under these circumstances is the human mind which seeks the divine to do with its waking
moments? For if these are subject to all the disabilities of mortal mentality, if they are open to the attacks of grief,
fear, anger, passion, hunger, greed, desire, it is irrational to suppose that by the mere concentration of the mental
being in the Yogic trance at the moment of putting off the body, the soul can pass away without return into the
supreme existence. For the man's normal consciousness is still subject to what the Buddhists call the chain or the
stream of Karma; it is still creating energies which must continue and have their effect in a continued life of the
mental being which is creating them. Or, to take another point of view, consciousness being the determining fact
and not the bodily existence which is only a result, the man still belongs normally to the status of human, or at
least mental activity and this cannot be abrogated by the fact of passing out of the physical body; to get rid of
mortal body is not to get rid of mortal mind. Nor is it sufficient to have a dominant disgust of the world or an
anti-vital indifference or aversion to the material existence; for this too belongs to the lower mental status and
activity. The highest teaching is that even the desire for liberation with all its mental concomitants must be
surpassed before the soul can be entirely free. Therefore not only must the mind be able to rise in abnormal
states out of itself into a higher consciousness, but its waking mentality also must be entirely spiritualised.
\par This brings into the field the second possibility open to the
Page 396

mental being; for if its first possibility is to rise out of itself into a divine supramental plane of being, the other is to
call down the divine into itself so that its mentality shall be changed into an image of the divine, shall be divinised
or spiritualised. This may be done and primarily must be done by the mind's power of reflecting that which it
knows, relates to its own consciousness, contemplates. For the mind is really a reflector and a medium and none
of its activities originate in themselves, none exist {\it per se}. Ordinarily, the mind reflects the status of mortal
nature and the activities of the Force which works under the conditions of the material universe. But if it
becomes clear, passive, pure by the renunciation of these activities and of the characteristic ideas and outlook of
mental nature, then as in a clear mirror or like the sky in clear water which is without ripple and unruffled by
winds, the divine is reflected. The mind still does not entirely possess the divine or become divine, but is
possessed by it or by a luminous reflection of it so long as it remains in this pure passivity. If it becomes active, it
falls back into the disturbance of the mortal nature and reflects that and no longer the divine. For this reason an
absolute quietism and a cessation first of all outer action and then of all inner movement is the ideal ordinarily
proposed; here too, for the follower of the path of knowledge, there must be a sort of waking Samadhi.
Whatever action is unavoidable, must be a purely superficial working of the organs of perception and motor
action in which the quiescent mind takes eventually no part and from which it seeks no result or profit.
\par But this is insufficient for the integral Yoga. There must be a positive transformation and not merely a
negative quiescence of the waking mentality. The transformation is possible because, although the divine planes
are above the mental consciousness and to enter actually into them we have ordinarily to lose the mental in
Samadhi, yet there are in the mental being divine planes superior to our normal mentality which reproduce the
conditions of the divine plane proper, although modified by the conditions, dominant here, of mentality. All that
belongs to the experience of the divine plane can there be seized, but in the
Page 397

mental way and in a mental form. To these planes of divine mentality it is possible for the developed human being
to arise in the waking state; or it is possible for him to derive from them a stream of influences and experiences
which shall eventually open to them and transform into their nature his whole waking existence. These higher
mental states are the immediate sources, the large actual instruments, the inner stations
\note{Called in the Veda variously seats, houses, placings or statuses, footings, earths, dwelling-places,
\s{sadas}, \s{g\,rha} or \s{k\,saya}, \s{dh\=ama}, \s{padam}, \s{bh\=umi}, \s{k\,siti}.} of his perfection.
\par But in arriving to these planes or deriving from them the limitations of our mentality pursue us. In the first
place the mind is an inveterate divider of the indivisible and its whole nature is to dwell on one thing at a time to
the exclusion of others or to stress it to the subordination of others. Thus in approaching Sachchidananda it will
dwell on its aspect of the pure existence, Sat, and consciousness and bliss are compelled then to lose themselves
or remain quiescent in the experience of pure, infinite being which leads to the realisation of the quietistic Monist.
Or it will dwell on the aspect of consciousness, Chit, and existence and bliss become then dependent on the
experience of an infinite transcendent Power and Conscious-Force, which leads to the realisation of the Tantric
worshipper of Energy. Or it will dwell on the aspect of delight, Ananda, and existence and consciousness then
seem to disappear into a bliss without basis of self-possessing awareness or constituent being, which leads to the
realisation of the Buddhistic seeker of Nirvana. Or it will dwell on some aspect of Sachchidananda which comes
to the mind from the supramental Knowledge, Will or Love, and then the infinite impersonal aspect of
Sachchidananda is almost or quite lost in the experience of the Deity which leads to the realisations of the
various religions and to the possession of some supernal world or divine status of the human soul in relation to
God. And for those whose object is to depart anywhither from cosmic existence, this is enough, since they are
able by the mind's immergence into or seizure upon any one of these principles or aspects to effect through
status in the divine planes of their
Page 398

mentality or the possession by them of their waking state this desired transit.
\par But the sadhaka of the integral Yoga has to harmonise all so that they may become a plenary and equal
unity of the full realisation of Sachchidananda. Here the last difficulty of mind meets him, its inability to hold at
once the unity and the multiplicity. It is not altogether difficult to arrive at and dwell in a pure infinite or even, at
the same time, a perfect global experience of the Existence which is Consciousness which is Delight. The mind
may even extend its experience of this Unity to the multiplicity so as to perceive it immanent in the universe and
in each object, force, movement in the universe or at the same time to be aware of this
Existence-Consciousness-Bliss containing the universe and enveloping all its objects and originating all its
movements. It is difficult indeed for it to unite and harmonise rightly all these experiences; but still it can possess
Sachchidananda at once in himself and immanent in all and the continent of all. But with this to unite the final
experience of all this as Sachchidananda and possess objects, movements, forces, forms as no other than He, is
the great difficulty for mind. Separately any of these things may be done; the mind may go from one to the other,
rejecting one as it arrives at another and calling this the lower or that the higher existence. But to unify without
losing, to integralise without rejecting is its supreme difficulty.
Page 399

\par
\hn Chapter XIV
\par
\ht The Passive and the Active Brahman
\par\drop The difficulty which the mental being experiences in arriving at an integral realisation of true being and
world-being may be met by following one or other of two different lines of his self-development. He may evolve
himself from plane to plane of his own being and embrace on each successively his oneness with the world and
with Sachchidananda realised as the Purusha and Prakriti, Conscious-Soul and Nature-Soul of that plane, taking
into himself the action of the lower grades of being as he ascends. He may, that is to say, work out by a sort of
inclusive process of self-enlargement and transformation the evolution of the material into the divine or spiritual
man. This seems to have been the method of the most ancient sages of which we get some glimpse in the Rig
Veda and some of the Upanishads.
\note{Notably, the Taittiriya Upanishad.} He may, on the other hand, aim straight at the realisation of pure
self-existence on the highest plane of mental being and from that secure basis realise spiritually under the
conditions of his mentality the process by which the self-existent becomes all existences, but without that descent
into the self-divided egoistic consciousness which is a circumstance of evolution in the Ignorance. Thus identified
with Sachchidananda in the universal self-existence as the spiritualised mental being, he may then ascend beyond
to the supramental plane of the pure spiritual existence. It is the latter method the stages of which we may now
attempt to trace for the seeker by the path of knowledge.
\par When the sadhaka has followed the discipline of withdrawal from the various identifications of the self with
the ego, the mind, the life, the body, he has arrived at realisation by knowledge of a pure, still, self-aware
existence, one, undivided, peaceful,
Page 400

inactive, undisturbed by the action of the world. The only relation that this Self seems to have with the world is
that of a disinterested Witness not at all involved in or affected or even touched by any of its activities. If this
state of consciousness is pushed farther one becomes aware of a self even more remote from world-existence;
all that is in the world is in a sense in that Self and yet at the same time extraneous to its consciousness,
non-existent in its existence, existing only in a sort of unreal mind,—a dream therefore, an illusion. This aloof and
transcendent Real Existence may be realised as an utter Self of one's own being; or the very idea of a self and
of one's own being may be swallowed up in it, so that it is only for the mind an unknowable That, unknowable to
the mental consciousness and without any possible kind of actual connection or commerce with world-existence.
It can even be realised by the mental being as a Nihil, Non-Existence or Void, but a Void of all that is in the
world, a Non-existence of all that is in the world and yet the only Reality. To proceed farther towards that
Transcendence by concentration of one's own being upon it is to lose mental existence and world-existence
altogether and cast oneself into the Unknowable.
\par The integral Yoga of knowledge demands instead a divine return upon world-existence and its first step
must be to realise the Self as the All, \sforced{sarva\.m brahma}. First, concentrating on the Self-existent, we
have to realise all of which the mind and senses are aware as a figure of things existing in this pure Self that we
now are to our own consciousness. This vision of the pure self translates itself to the mind-sense and the
mind-perception as an infinite Reality in which all exists merely as name and form, not precisely unreal, not a
hallucination or a dream, but still only a creation of the consciousness, perceptual and subtly sensible rather than
substantial. In this poise of the consciousness all seems to be, if not a dream, yet very much like a representation
or puppet-show taking place in the calm, motionless, peaceful, indifferent Self. Our own phenomenal existence is
part of this conceptual movement, a mechanical form of mind and body among other forms, ourselves a name of
being
Page 401

among other names, automatically mobile in this Self with its all-encompassing, still self-awareness. The active
consciousness of the world is not present in this state to our realisation, because thought has been stilled in us and
therefore our own consciousness is perfectly still and inactive,—whatever we do, seems to be purely mechanical,
not attended with any conscious origination by our active will and knowledge. Or if thought occurs, that also
happens mechanically like the rest, like the movement of our body, moved by the unseen springs of Nature as in
the plant and element and not by any active will of our self-existence. For this Self is the immobile and does not
originate or take part in the action which it allows. This Self is the All in the sense only of being the infinite One
who is immutably and contains all names and forms.
\par The basis of this status of consciousness is the mind's exclusive realisation of pure self-existence in which
consciousness is at rest, inactive, widely concentrated in pure self-awareness of being, not active and originative
of any kind of becoming. Its aspect of knowledge is at rest in the awareness of undifferentiated identity; its
aspect of force and will is at rest in the awareness of unmodifiable immutability. And yet it is aware of names
and forms, it is aware of movement; but this movement does not seem to proceed from the Self, but to go on by
some inherent power of its own and only to be reflected in the Self. In other words, the mental being has put
away from himself by exclusive concentration the dynamic aspect of consciousness, has taken refuge in the
static and built a wall of non-communication between the two; between the passive and the active Brahman a
gulf has been created and they stand on either side of it, the one visible to the other but with no contact, no touch
of sympathy, no sense of unity between them. Therefore to the passive Self all conscious being seems to be
passive in its nature, all activity seems to be non-conscious in itself and mechanical (\s{ja\,da}) in its movement.
The realisation of this status is the basis of the ancient Sankhya philosophy which taught that the Purusha or
Conscious-Soul is a passive, inactive, immutable entity, Prakriti or the Nature-Soul including even
Page 402

the mind and the \NH understanding active, mutable, mechanical, but reflected in the Purusha which identifies
itself with what is reflected in it and lends to it its own light of consciousness. When the Purusha learns not to
identify himself, then Prakriti begins to fall away from its impulse of movement and returns towards equilibrium
and rest. The Vedantic view of the same status led to the philosophy of the inactive Self or Brahman as the one
reality and of all the rest as name and form imposed on it by a false activity of mental illusion which has to be
removed by right knowledge of the immutable Self and refusal of the imposition.
\note{\s{adhy\=aropa}.} The two views really differ only in their language and their view-point; substantially, they
are the same intellectual generalisation from the same spiritual experience.
\par If we rest here, there are only two possible attitudes towards the world. Either we must remain as mere
inactive witnesses of the world-play or act in it mechanically without any participation of the conscious self and
by mere play of the organs of sense and motor-action.
\note{\s{kevalair indriyair}. Gita.} In the former choice what we do is to approach as completely as possible to
the inactivity of the passive and silent Brahman. We have stilled our mind and silenced the activity of the thought
and the disturbances of the heart, we have arrived at an entire inner peace and indifference; we attempt now to
still the mechanical action of the life and body, to reduce it to the most meagre minimum possible so that it may
eventually cease entirely and for ever. This, the final aim of the ascetic Yoga which refuses life, is evidently not
our aim. By the alternative choice we can have an activity perfect enough in outward appearance along with an
entire inner passivity, peace, mental silence, indifference and cessation of the emotions, absence of choice in the
will.
\par To the ordinary mind this does not seem possible. As, emotionally, it cannot conceive of activity without
desire and emotional preference, so intellectually it cannot conceive of activity without thought-conception,
conscious motive and energising of the will. But, as a matter of fact, we see that a large part of our
Page 403

own action as well as the whole activity of inanimate and merely animate life is done by a mechanical impulse
and movement in which these elements are not, openly at least, at work. It may be said that this is only possible
of the purely physical and vital activity and not of those movements which ordinarily depend upon the functioning
of the conceptual and volitional mind, such as speech, writing and all the intelligent action of human life. But this
again is not true, as we find when we are able to go behind the habitual and normal process of our mental nature.
It has been found by recent psychological experiment that all these operations can be effected without any
conscious origination in the thought and will of the apparent actor; his organs of sense and action, including the
speech, become passive instruments for a thought and will other than his.
\par Certainly, behind all intelligent action there must be an intelligent will, but it need not be the intelligence or the
will of the conscious mind in the actor. In the psychological phenomena of which I have spoken, it is obviously in
some of them the will and intelligence of other human beings that uses the organs, in others it is doubtful whether
it is an influence or actuation by other beings or the emergence of a subconscious, subliminal mind or a mixed
combination of both these agencies. But in this Yogic status of action by the mere organs, \sforced{kevalair
indriyair}, it is the universal intelligence and will of Nature itself working from centres superconscious and
subconscious as it acts in the mechanically purposeful energies of plant-life or of the inanimate material form, but
here with a living instrument who is the conscious witness of the action and instrumentation. It is a remarkable
fact that the speech, writing and intelligent actions of such a state may convey a perfect force of thought,
luminous, faultless, logical, inspired, perfectly adapting means to ends, far beyond what the man himself could
have done in his old normal poise of mind and will and capacity, yet all the time he himself perceives but does not
conceive the thought that comes to him, observes in its works but does not appropriate or use the will that acts
through him, witnesses but does not claim as his own the powers which play upon the world through him as
through
Page 404

a passive channel. But this phenomenon is not really abnormal or contrary to the general law of things. For do
we not see a perfect working of the secret universal Will and Intelligence in the apparently brute (\s{ja\,da})
action of material Nature? And it is precisely this universal Will and Intelligence which thus acts through the
calm, indifferent and inwardly silent Yogin who offers no obstacle of limited and ignorant personal will and
intelligence to its operations. He dwells in the silent Self; he allows the active Brahman to work through his
natural instruments, accepting impartially, without participation, the formations of its universal force and
knowledge.
\par This status of an inner passivity and an outer action independent of each other is a state of entire spiritual
freedom. The Yogin, as the Gita says, even in acting does no actions, for it is not he, but universal Nature
directed by the Lord of Nature which is at work. He is not bound by his works, nor do they leave any after
effects or consequences in his mind, nor cling to or leave any mark on his soul;
\note{\s{na karma lipyate nare}. Isha Upanishad.} they vanish and are dissolved
\note{\s{pravil\=iyante karm\=a\,ni}. Gita.} by their very execution and leave the immutable self unaffected and the
soul unmodified. Therefore this would seem to be the poise the uplifted soul ought to take, if it has still to
preserve any relations with human action in the world-existence, an unalterable silence, tranquillity, passivity
within, an action without regulated by the universal Will and Wisdom which works, as the Gita says, without
being involved in, bound by or ignorantly attached to its works. And certainly this poise of a perfect activity
founded upon a perfect inner passivity is that which the Yogin has to possess, as we have seen in the Yoga of
Works. But here in this status of self-knowledge at which we have arrived, there is an evident absence of
integrality; for there is still a gulf, an unrealised unity or a cleft of consciousness between the passive and the
active Brahman. We have still to possess consciously the active Brahman without losing the possession of the
silent Self. We have to preserve the inner silence, tranquillity,
Page 405

passivity as a foundation; but in place of an aloof indifference to the works of the active Brahman we have to
arrive at an equal and impartial delight in them; in place of a refusal to participate lest our freedom and peace be
lost we have to arrive at a conscious possession of the active Brahman whose joy of existence does not abrogate
His peace, nor His lordship of all workings impair His calm freedom in the midst of His works.
\par The difficulty is created by the exclusive concentration of the mental being on its plane of pure existence in
which consciousness is at rest in passivity and delight of existence at rest in peace of existence. It has to
embrace also its plane of conscious force of existence in which consciousness is active as power and will and
delight is active as joy of existence. Here the difficulty is that mind is likely to precipitate itself into the
consciousness of Force instead of possessing it. The extreme mental state of precipitation into Nature is that of
the ordinary man who takes his bodily and vital activity and the mind-movements dependent on them for his
whole real existence and regards all passivity of the soul as a departure from existence and an approach towards
nullity. He lives in the superficies of the active Brahman and while to the silent soul exclusively concentrated in
the passive self all activities are mere name and form, to him they are the only reality and it is the Self that is
merely a name. In one the passive Brahman stands aloof from the active and does not share in its consciousness;
in the other the active Brahman stands aloof from the passive and does not share in its consciousness nor wholly
possess its own. Each is to the other in these exclusivenesses an inertia of status or an inertia of mechanically
active non-possession of self if not altogether an unreality. But the sadhaka who has once seen firmly the
essence of things and tasted thoroughly the peace of the silent Self, is not likely to be content with any state
which involves loss of self-knowledge or a sacrifice of the peace of the soul. He will not precipitate himself back
into the mere individual movement of mind and life and body with all its ignorance and straining and disturbance.
Whatever new status he may acquire, will only satisfy him if it is founded upon and includes that which he has
already
Page 406

found to be indispensable to real self-knowledge, self-delight and self-possession.
\par Still there is the likelihood of a partial, superficial and temporary relapse into the old mental movement when
he attempts again to ally himself to the activity of the world. To prevent this relapse or to cure it when it arrives,
he has to hold fast to the truth of Sachchidananda and extend his realisation of the infinite One into the
movement of the infinite multiplicity. He has to concentrate on and realise the one Brahman in all things as
conscious force of being as well as pure awareness of conscious being. The Self as the All, not only in the
unique essence of things, but in the manifold form of things, not only as containing all in a transcendent
consciousness, but as becoming all by a constituting consciousness, this is the next step towards his true
possession of existence. In proportion as this realisation is accomplished, the status of consciousness as well as
the mental view proper to it will change. Instead of an immutable Self containing name and form, containing
without sharing in them the mutations of Nature, there will be the consciousness of the Self immutable in
essence, unalterable in its fundamental poise but constituting and becoming in its experience all these existences
which the mind distinguishes as name and form. All formations of mind and body will be not merely figures
reflected in the Purusha, but real forms of which Brahman, Self, conscious Being is the substance and, as it
were, the material of their formation. The name attaching to the form will be not a mere conception of the mind
answering to no real existence bearing the name, but there will be behind it a true power of conscious being, a
true self-experience of the Brahman answering to something that it contained potential but unmanifest in its
silence. And yet in all its mutations it will be realised as one, free and above them. The realisation of a sole
Reality suffering the imposition of names and forms will give place to that of eternal Being throwing itself out into
infinite becoming. All existences will be to the consciousness of the Yogin soul-forms and not merely idea-forms
of the Self, of himself, one with him, contained in his universal existence. All the soul-life, mental, vital, bodily
existence of all
Page 407

that exists will be to him one indivisible movement and activity of the Being who is the same forever. The Self
will be realised as the all in its double aspect of immutable status and mutable activity and it is this that will be
seen as the comprehensive truth of our existence.
Page 408

\par
\hn Chapter XV
\par
\ht The Cosmic Consciousness
\par\drop To realise and unite oneself with the active Brahman is to exchange, perfectly or imperfectly according
as the union is partial or complete, the individual for the cosmic consciousness. The ordinary existence of man is
not only an individual but an egoistic consciousness; it is, that is to say, the individual soul or Jivatman identifying
himself with the nodus of his mental, vital, physical experiences in the movement of universal Nature, that is to
say, with his mind-created ego, and, less intimately, with the mind, life, body which receive the experiences. Less
intimately, because of these he can say “my mind, life, body,” he can regard them as himself, yet partly as not
himself and something rather which he possesses and uses, but of the ego he says, “It is I.” By detaching himself
from all identification with mind, life and body, he can get back from his ego to the consciousness of the true
Individual, the Jivatman, who is the real possessor of mind, life and body. Looking back from this Individual to
that of which it is the representative and conscious figure, he can get back to the transcendent consciousness of
pure Self, absolute Existence or absolute Non-being, three poises of the same eternal Reality. But between the
movement of universal Nature and this transcendent Existence, possessor of the one and cosmic self of the
other, is the cosmic consciousness, the universal Purusha of whom all Nature is the Prakriti or active conscious
Force. We can arrive at that, become that whether by breaking the walls of the ego laterally, as it were, and
identifying oneself with all existences in the One, or else from above by realising the pure Self or absolute
Existence in its outgoing, immanent, all-embracing, all-constituting self-knowledge and self-creative power.
\par The immanent, silent Self in all is the foundation of this cosmic consciousness for the experience of the
mental being. It is
Page 409

the Witness pure and omnipresent who as the silent Conscious Soul of the cosmos regards all the activity of the
universe; it is Sachchidananda for whose delight universal Nature displays the eternal procession of her works.
We are aware of an unwounded Delight, a pure and perfect Presence, an infinite and self-contained Power
present in ourselves and all things, not divided by their divisions, not affected by the stress and struggle of the
cosmic manifestation; it is within it all, but it is superior to it all. Because of that all this exists, but that does not
exist because of all this; it is too great to be limited by the movement in Time and Space which it inhabits and
supports. This foundation enables us to possess in the security of the divine existence the whole universe within
our own being. We are no longer limited and shut in by what we inhabit, but like the Divine contain in ourselves
all that for the purpose of the movement of Nature we consent to inhabit. We are not mind or life or body, but
the informing and sustaining Soul, silent, peaceful, eternal, which possesses them; and since we find this Soul
everywhere sustaining and informing and possessing all lives and minds and bodies, we cease to regard it as a
separate and individual being in our own. In it all this moves and acts; within all this it is stable and immutable.
Having this, we possess our eternal self-existence at rest in its eternal consciousness and bliss.
\par Next we have to realise this silent Self as the Lord of all the action of universal Nature; we have to see that
it is this same Self-existent who is displayed in the creative force of His eternal consciousness. All this action is
only His power and knowledge and self-delight going abroad in His infinite being to do the works of His eternal
wisdom and will. We shall realise the Divine, the eternal Self of all, first, as the source of all action and inaction,
of all knowledge and ignorance, of all delight and suffering, of all good and evil, perfection and imperfection, of all
force and form, of all the outgoing of Nature from the eternal divine Principle and of all the return of Nature
towards the Divine. We shall realise it next as itself going abroad in its Power and Knowledge,—for the Power
and Knowledge are itself,—not only the source of their works, but the creator and
Page 410

doer of their works, one in all existences; for the many souls of the universal manifestation are only faces of the
one Divine, the many minds, lives, bodies are only His masks and disguises. We perceive each being to be the
universal Narayana presenting to us many faces; we lose ourselves in that universality and perceive our own
mind, life and body as only one presentation of the Self, while all whom we formerly conceived of as others, are
now to our consciousness our self in other minds, lives and bodies. All force and idea and event and figure of
things in the universe are only manifest degrees of this Self, values of the Divine in His eternal self-figuration.
Thus viewing things and beings we may see them first as if they were parts and parcels of His divided
being;
\note{The Gita speaks of the Jiva as a portion of the Lord.} but the realisation and the knowledge are not
complete unless we go beyond this idea of quality and space and division by which there comes the experience
of less and more, large and small, part and whole, and see the whole Infinite everywhere; we must see the
universe and each thing in the universe as in its existence and secret consciousness and power and delight the
indivisible Divine in its entirety, however much the figure it makes to our minds may appear only as a partial
manifestation. When we possess thus the Divine as at once the silent and surpassing Witness and the active
Lord and all-constituting Being without making any division between these aspects, we possess the whole cosmic
Divine, embrace all of the universal Self and Reality, are awake to the cosmic consciousness.
\par What will be the relation of our individual existence to this cosmic consciousness to which we have attained?
For since we have still a mind and body and human life, our individual existence persists even though our
separate individual consciousness has been transcended. It is quite possible to realise the cosmic consciousness
without becoming that; we can see it, that is to say, with the soul, feel it and dwell in it; we can even be united
with it without becoming wholly one with it; in a word, we may preserve the individual consciousness of the
Jivatman within the cosmic consciousness of the universal Self. We may preserve a
Page 411

yet greater distinctness between the two and enjoy the relations between them; we may remain, in a way,
entirely the individual self while participating in the bliss and infinity of the universal Self. Or we may possess
them both as a greater and lesser self, one we feel pouring itself out in the universal play of the divine
consciousness and force, the other in the action of the same universal Being through our individual soul-centre or
soul-form for the purposes of an individual play of mind, life and body. But the summit of this cosmic realisation
by knowledge is always the power to dissolve the personality in universal being, to merge the individual in the
cosmic consciousness, to liberate even the soul-form into the unity and universality of the Spirit. This is the
\s{laya}, dissolution, or \s{mok\,sa}, liberation, at which the Yoga of Knowledge aims. This may extend itself, as
in the traditional Yoga, to the dissolution of mind, life and body itself into the silent Self or absolute Existence; but
the essence of the liberation is the merging of the individual in the Infinite. When the Yogin no longer feels
himself to be a consciousness situated in the body or limited by the mind, but has lost the sense of division in the
boundlessness of an infinite consciousness, that which he set out to do is accomplished. Afterwards the retaining
or non-retaining of the human life is a circumstance of no essential importance, for it is always the formless One
who acts through its many forms of the mind and life and body and each soul is only one of the stations from
which it chooses to watch and receive and actuate its own play.
\par That into which we merge ourselves in the cosmic consciousness is Sachchidananda. It is one eternal
Existence that we then are, one eternal Consciousness which sees its own works in us and others, one eternal
Will or Force of that Consciousness which displays itself in infinite workings, one eternal Delight which has the
joy of itself and all its workings. It is itself stable, immutable, timeless, spaceless, supreme and it is still itself in the
infinity of its workings, not changed by their variations, not broken up by their multiplicity, not increased or
diminished by their ebbings and flowings in the seas of Time and Space, not confused by their apparent
contrarieties or limited by their divinely-willed
Page 412

limitations. Sachchidananda is the unity of the many-sidedness of manifested things, Sachchidananda is the
eternal harmony of all their variations and oppositions, Sachchidananda is the infinite perfection which justifies
their limitations and is the goal of their imperfections.
\par So much for the essential relation; but we have to see also the practical results of this internal
transformation. It is evident that by dwelling in this cosmic consciousness our whole experience and valuation of
everything in the universe will be radically changed. As individual egos we dwell in the Ignorance and judge
everything by a broken, partial and personal standard of knowledge; we experience everything according to the
capacity of a limited consciousness and force and are therefore unable to give a divine response or set the true
value upon any part of cosmic experience. We experience limitation, weakness, incapacity, grief, pain, struggle
and its contradictory emotions and we accept these things and their opposites as opposites in an eternal duality
and cannot reconcile them in the eternity of an absolute good and happiness. We live by fragments of experience
and judge by our fragmentary values each thing and the whole. When we try to arrive at absolute values we only
promote some partial view of things to do duty for a totality in the divine workings; we then make believe that our
fractions are integers and try to thrust our one-sided view-points into the catholicity of the all-vision of the Divine.
\par But by entering into the cosmic consciousness we begin to participate in that all-vision and see everything in
the values of the Infinite and the One. Limitation itself, ignorance itself change their meaning for us. Ignorance
changes into a particularising action of divine knowledge; strength and weakness and incapacity change into a
free putting forth and holding back various measures of divine Force; joy and grief, pleasure and pain change into
a mastering and a suffering of divine delight; struggle, losing its discords, becomes a balancing of forces and
values in the divine harmony. We do not then suffer by the limitations of our mind, life and body; for we no
longer live in these, even when we record and accept them, but in the infinity of the Spirit, and
Page 413

these we view in their right value and place and purpose in the manifestation, as degrees of the supreme being,
conscious-force and delight of Sachchidananda veiling and manifesting Himself in the cosmos. We cease also to
judge other men and things by their outward appearances and are delivered from hostile and contradictory ideas
and emotions; for it is the soul that we see, the Divine that we seek and find in every thing and creature, and the
rest has only a secondary value to us in a scheme of relations which exist now for us only as self-expressions of
the Divine and not as having any absolute value in themselves. So too no event can disturb us, since the
distinction of happy and unhappy, beneficent and maleficent happenings loses its force, and all is seen in its divine
value and its divine purpose. Thus we arrive at a perfect liberation and an infinite equality. It is this
consummation of which the Upanishad speaks when it says “He in whom the self has become all existences,
how shall he have delusion, whence shall he have grief who knows entirely
\note{\s{Vij\=anata\,h}. Vijnana is the knowledge of the One and the Many, by which the Many are seen in the
terms of the One, in the infinite unifying Truth, Right, Vast of the divine existence.} and sees in all things
oneness.”
\par But this can be only when there is perfection in the cosmic consciousness, and that is difficult for the mental
being. The mentality when it arrives at the idea or the realisation of the Spirit, the Divine, tends to break
existence into two opposite halves, the lower and the higher existence. It sees on one side the Infinite, the
Formless, the One, the Peace and Bliss, the Calm and Silence, the Absolute, the Vast and Pure; on the other it
sees the finite, the world of forms, the jarring multiplicity, the strife and suffering and imperfect, unreal good, the
tormented activity and futile success, the relative, the limited and vain and vile. To those who make this division
and this opposition, complete liberation is only attainable in the peace of the One, in the featurelessness of the
Infinite, in the non-becoming of the Absolute which is to them the only real being; to be free all values must be
destroyed, all limitations not only transcended but abolished.
Page 414

They have the liberation of the divine rest, but not the liberty of the divine action; they enjoy the peace of the
Transcendent, but not the cosmic bliss of the Transcendent. Their liberty depends upon abstention from the
cosmic movement, it cannot dominate and possess cosmic existence itself. But it is also possible for them to
realise and participate in the immanent as well as the transcendent peace. Still the division is not cured. The
liberty they enjoy is that of the silent unacting Witness, not the liberty of the divine Master-consciousness which
possesses all things, delights in all, casts itself into all forms of existence without fear of fall or loss or bondage or
stain. All the rights of the Spirit are not yet possessed; there is still a denial, a limitation, a holding back from the
entire oneness of all existence. The workings of Mind, Life, Body are viewed from the calm and peace of the
spiritual planes of the mental being and are filled with that calm and peace; they are not possessed by and
subjected to the law of the all-mastering Spirit.
\par All this is when the mental being takes its station in its own spiritual planes, in the mental planes of Sat, Chit,
Ananda, and casts down their light and delight upon the lower existence. But there is possible the attempt at a
kind of cosmic consciousness by dwelling on the lower planes themselves after breaking their limitations laterally,
as we have said, and then calling down into them the light and largeness of the higher existence. Not only Spirit is
one, but Mind, Life, Matter are one. There is one cosmic Mind, one cosmic Life, one cosmic Body. All the
attempt of man to arrive at universal sympathy, universal love and the understanding and knowledge of the inner
soul of other existences is an attempt to beat thin, breach and eventually break down by the power of the
enlarging mind and heart the walls of the ego and arrive nearer to a cosmic oneness. And if we can by the mind
and heart get at the touch of the Spirit, receive the powerful inrush of the Divine into this lower humanity and
change our nature into a reflection of the divine nature by love, by universal joy, by oneness of mind with all
Nature and all beings, we can break down the walls. Even our bodies are not really separate entities and
therefore our very physical consciousness is capable
Page 415

of oneness with the physical consciousness of others and of the cosmos. The Yogin is able to feel his body one
with all bodies, to be aware of and even to participate in their affections; he can feel constantly the unity of all
Matter and be aware of his physical being as only a movement in its movement.
\note{\s{jagaty\=a\.m jagat}. Isha Upanishad.} Still more is it possible for him to feel constantly and normally the
whole sea of the infinite life as his true vital existence and his own life as only a wave of that boundless surge.
And more easily yet is it possible for him to unite himself in mind and heart with all existences, be aware of their
desires, struggles, joys, sorrows, thoughts, impulses, in a sense as if they were his own, at least as occurring in his
larger self hardly less intimately or quite as intimately as the movements of his own heart and mind. This too is a
realisation of cosmic consciousness.
\par It may even seem as if it were the greatest oneness, since it accepts all that we can be sensible of in the
mind-created world as our own. Sometimes one sees it spoken of as the highest achievement. Certainly, it is a
great realisation and the path to a greater. It is that which the Gita speaks of as the accepting of all existences as
if oneself whether in grief or in joy; it is the way of sympathetic oneness and infinite compassion which helps the
Buddhist to arrive at his Nirvana. Still there are gradations and degrees. In the first stage the soul is still subject
to the reactions of the duality, still subject therefore to the lower Prakriti; it is depressed or hurt by the cosmic
suffering, elated by the cosmic joy. We suffer the joys of others, suffer their griefs; and this oneness can be
carried even into the body, as in the story of the Indian saint who, seeing a bullock tortured in the field by its cruel
owner, cried out with the creature's pain and the weal of the lash was found reproduced on his own flesh. But
there must be a oneness with Sachchidananda in his freedom as well as with the subjection of the lower being to
the reactions of Prakriti. This is achieved when the soul is free and superior to the cosmic reactions which are
then felt only in the life, mind and body and as an inferior movement; the soul understands, accepts the
experience,
Page 416

sympathises, but is not overpowered or affected, so that at last even the mind and body learn also to accept
without being overpowered or even affected except on their surface. And the consummation of this movement is
when the two spheres of existence are no longer divided and the mind, life and body obeying utterly the higher
law grow into the spirit's freedom; free from the lower or ignorant response to the cosmic touches, their struggle
and their subjection to the duality ceases. This does not mean insensibility to the subjection and struggles and
sufferings of others, but it does mean a spiritual supremacy and freedom which enables one to understand
perfectly, put the right values on things and heal from above instead of struggling from below. It does not inhibit
the divine compassion and helpfulness, but it does inhibit the human and animal sorrow and suffering.
\par The link between the spiritual and the lower planes of the being is that which is called in the old Vedantic
phraseology the \s{vij\~n\=ana} and which we may describe in our modern turn of language as the Truth-plane or the
ideal mind or supermind. There the One and the Many meet and our being is freely open to the revealing light of
the divine Truth and the inspiration of the divine Will and Knowledge. If we can break down the veil of the
intellectual, emotional, sensational mind which our ordinary existence has built between us and the Divine, we
can then take up through the Truth-mind all our mental, vital and physical experience and offer it up to the
spiritual—this was the secret or mystic sense of the old Vedic “sacrifice”—to be converted into the terms of the
infinite truth of Sachchidananda, and we can receive the powers and illuminations of the infinite Existence in
forms of a divine knowledge, will and delight to be imposed on our mentality, vitality, physical existence till the
lower members are transformed into the perfect vessel of the higher nature. This was the double Vedic
movement of the descent and birth of the gods in the human creature and the ascent of the human powers that
struggle towards the divine knowledge, power and delight and climb into the godheads, the result of which was
the possession of the One, the infinite, the beatific existence, the union with God, the Immortality. By possession
of this ideal plane we
Page 417

break down entirely the opposition of the lower and the higher existence, the false gulf created by the Ignorance
between the finite and the Infinite, God and Nature, the One and the Many, open the gates of the Divine, fulfil
the individual in the complete harmony of the cosmic consciousness and realise in the cosmic being the epiphany
of the transcendent Sachchidananda. And these results, which obtained on the supramental plane itself or
beyond, would be the highest perfection of the human being, we can attain to partially, in a very modified way, in
a sort of mental figure by awakening into activity on the corresponding plane of the mental nature. We can get a
luminous shadow of that perfect harmony and light. But this belongs to another part of our subject; it is the
knowledge on which we must found our Yoga of self-perfection.
Page 418

\par
\hn Chapter XVI
\par
\ht Oneness
\par\drop When, then, by the withdrawal of the centre of consciousness from identification with the mind, life and
body, one has discovered one's true self, discovered the oneness of that self with the pure, silent, immutable
Brahman, discovered in the immutable, in the Akshara Brahman, that by which the individual being escapes from
his own personality into the impersonal, the first movement of the Path of Knowledge has been completed. It is
the sole that is absolutely necessary for the traditional aim of the Yoga of Knowledge, for immergence, for
escape from cosmic existence, for release into the absolute and ineffable Parabrahman who is beyond all cosmic
being. The seeker of this ultimate release may take other realisations on his way, may realise the Lord of the
universe, the Purusha who manifests Himself in all creatures, may arrive at the cosmic consciousness, may know
and feel his unity with all beings; but these are only stages or circumstances of his journey, results of the
unfolding of his soul as it approaches nearer the ineffable goal. To pass beyond them all is his supreme object.
When on the other hand, having attained to the freedom and the silence and the peace, we resume possession by
the cosmic consciousness of the active as well as the silent Brahman and can securely live in the divine freedom
as well as rest in it, we have completed the second movement of the Path by which the integrality of
self-knowledge becomes the station of the liberated soul.
\par The soul thus possesses itself in the unity of Sachchidananda upon all the manifest planes of its own being.
This is the characteristic of the integral knowledge that it unifies all in Sachchidananda because not only is Being
one in itself, but it is one everywhere, in all its poises and in every aspect, in its utmost appearance of multiplicity
as in its utmost appearance of oneness. The traditional knowledge while it admits this truth in
Page 419

theory, yet reasons practically as if the oneness were not equal everywhere or could not be equally realised in all.
It finds it in the unmanifest Absolute, but not so much in the manifestation, finds it purer in the Impersonal than in
the Personal, complete in the Nirguna, not so complete in the Saguna, satisfyingly present in the silent and
inactive Brahman, not so satisfyingly present in the active. Therefore it places all these other terms of the
Absolute below their opposites in the scale of ascent and urges their final rejection as if it were indispensable to
the utter realisation. The integral knowledge makes no such division; it arrives at a different kind of absoluteness
in its vision of the unity. It finds the same oneness in the Unmanifest and the Manifest, in the Impersonal and the
Personal, in Nirguna and Saguna, in the infinite depths of the universal silence and the infinite largeness of the
universal action. It finds the same absolute oneness in the Purusha and the Prakriti; in the divine Presence and
the works of the divine Power and Knowledge; in the eternal manifestness of the one Purusha and the constant
manifestation of the many Purushas; in the inalienable unity of Sachchidananda keeping constantly real to itself
its own manifold oneness and in the apparent divisions of mind, life and body in which oneness is constantly, if
secretly real and constantly seeks to be realised. All unity is to it an intense, pure and infinite realisation, all
difference an abundant, rich and boundless realisation of the same divine and eternal Being.
\par The complete realisation of unity is therefore the essence of the integral knowledge and of the integral
Yoga. To know Sachchidananda one in Himself and one in all His manifestation is the basis of knowledge; to
make that vision of oneness real to the consciousness in its status and in its action and to become that by merging
the sense of separate individuality in the sense of unity with the Being and with all beings is its effectuation in
Yoga of knowledge; to live, think, feel, will and act in that sense of unity is its effectuation in the individual being
and the individual life. This realisation of oneness and this practice of oneness in difference is the whole of the
Yoga.
\par Sachchidananda is one in Himself in whatever status or
Page 420

whatever plane of existence. We have therefore to make that the basis of all effectuation whether of
consciousness or force or being, whether of knowledge or will or delight. We have, as we have seen, to live in
the consciousness of the Absolute transcendent and of the Absolute manifested in all relations, impersonal and
manifest as all personalities, beyond all qualities and rich in infinite quality, a silence out of which the eternal
Word creates, a divine calm and peace possessing itself in infinite joy and activity. We have to find Him knowing
all, sanctioning all, governing all, containing, upholding and informing all as the Purusha and at the same time
executing all knowledge, will and formation as Prakriti. We have to see Him as one Existence, Being gathered in
itself and Being displayed in all existences; as one Consciousness concentrated in the unity of its existence,
extended in universal nature and many-centred in innumerable beings; one Force static in its repose of
self-gathered consciousness and dynamic in its activity of extended consciousness; one Delight blissfully aware
of its featureless infinity and blissfully aware of all feature and force and forms as itself; one creative knowledge
and governing Will, supramental, originative and determinative of all minds, lives and bodies; one Mind containing
all mental beings and constituting all their mental activities; one Life active in all living beings and generative of
their vital activities; one substance constituting all forms and objects as the visible and sensible mould in which
mind and life manifest and act just as one pure existence is that ether in which all Conscious-Force and Delight
exist unified and find themselves variously. For these are the seven principles of the manifest being of
Sachchidananda.
\par The integral Yoga of knowledge has to recognise the double nature of this manifestation,—for there is the
higher nature of Sachchidananda in which He is found and the lower nature of mind, life and body in which He is
veiled,—and to reconcile and unite the two in the oneness of the illumined realisation. We have not to leave them
separate so that we live a sort of double life, spiritual within or above, mental and material in our active and
earthly living; we have to re-view and remould the lower living in the light, force and joy of the higher reality. We
have to
Page 421

realise Matter as a sense-created mould of Spirit, a vehicle for all manifestation of the light, force and joy of
Sachchidananda in the highest conditions of terrestrial being and activity. We have to see Life as a channel for
the infinite Force divine and break the barrier of a sense-created and mind-created farness and division from it so
that that divine Power may take possession of and direct and change all our life-activities until our vitality
transfigured ceases in the end to be the limited life-force which now supports mind and body and becomes a
figure of the all-blissful conscious-force of Sachchidananda. We have similarly to change our sensational and
emotional mentality into a play of the divine Love and universal Delight; and we have to surcharge the intellect
which seeks to know and will in us with the light of the divine Knowledge-Will until it is transformed into a figure
of that higher and sublime activity.
\par This transformation cannot be complete or really executed without the awakening of the truth-mind which
corresponds in the mental being to the Supermind and is capable of receiving mentally its illuminations. By the
opposition of Spirit and Mind without the free opening of this intermediate power the two natures, higher and
lower, stand divided, and though there may be communication and influence or the catching up of the lower into
the higher in a sort of luminous or ecstatic trance, there cannot be a full and perfect transfiguration of the lower
nature. We may feel imperfectly by the emotional mind, we may have a sense by the sense-mind or a conception
and perception by the intelligent mind of the Spirit present in Matter and all its forms, the divine Delight present in
all emotion and sensation, the divine Force behind all life-activities; but the lower will still keep its own nature and
limit and divide in its action and modify in its character the influence from above. Even when that influence
assumes its highest, widest, intensest power, it will be irregular and disorderly in activity and perfectly realised
only in calm and stillness; we shall be subject to reactions and periods of obscuration when it is withdrawn from
us; we shall be apt to forget it in the stress of ordinary life and its outward touches and the siege of its dualities
and to be fully possessed of it only
Page 422

when alone with ourselves and God or else only in moments or periods of a heightened exaltation and ecstasy.
For our mentality, a restricted instrument moving in a limited field and seizing things by fragments and parcels, is
necessarily shifting, restless and mutable; it can find steadiness only by limiting its field of action and fixity only
by cessation and repose.
\par Our direct truth-perceptions on the other hand come from that Supermind,—a Will that knows and a
Knowledge that effects,—which creates universal order out of infinity. Its awakening into action brings down,
says the Veda, the unrestricted downpour of the rain of heaven,—the full flowing of the seven rivers from a
superior sea of light and power and joy. It reveals Sachchidananda. It reveals the Truth behind the scattered and
ill-combined suggestions of our mentality and makes each to fall into its place in the unity of the Truth behind;
thus it can transform the half-light of our minds into a certain totality of light. It reveals the Will behind all the
devious and imperfectly regulated strivings of our mental will and emotional wishes and vital effort and makes
each to fall into its place in the unity of the luminous Will behind; thus it can transform the half-obscure struggle
of our life and mind into a certain totality of ordered force. It reveals the delight for which each of our sensations
and emotions is groping and from which they fall back in movements of partially grasped satisfaction or of
dissatisfaction, pain, grief or indifference, and makes each take its place in the unity of the universal delight
behind; thus it can transform the conflict of our dualised emotions and sensations into a certain totality of serene,
yet profound and powerful love and delight. Moreover, revealing the universal action, it shows the truth of being
out of which each of its movements arises and to which each progresses, the force of effectuation which each
carries with it and the delight of being for which and from which each is born, and it relates all to the universal
being, consciousness, force and delight of Sachchidananda. Thus it harmonises for us all the oppositions,
divisions, contrarieties of existence and shows us in them the One and the Infinite. Uplifted into this supramental
light, pain and pleasure and indifference begin to be converted into joy of
Page 423

the one self-existent Delight; strength and weakness, success and failure turn into powers of the one
self-effective Force and Will; truth and error, knowledge and ignorance change into light of the one infinite
self-awareness and universal knowledge; increase of being and diminution of being, limitation and the overcoming
of limitation are transfigured into waves of the one self-realising conscious existence. All our life as well as all
our essential being is transformed into the possession of Sachchidananda.
\par By way of this integral knowledge we arrive at the unity of the aims set before themselves by the three
paths of knowledge, works and devotion. Knowledge aims at the realisation of true self-existence; works are
directed to the realisation of the divine Conscious-Will which secretly governs all works; devotion yearns for the
realisation of the Bliss which enjoys as the Lover all beings and all existences,—Sat, Chit-Tapas and Ananda.
Each therefore aims at possessing Sachchidananda through one or other aspect of his triune divine nature. By
Knowledge we arrive always at our true, eternal, immutable being, the self-existent which every “I” in the
universe obscurely represents, and we abrogate difference in the great realisation, So Aham, I am He, while we
arrive also at our identity with all other beings.
\par But at the same time the integral knowledge gives us the awareness of that infinite existence as the
conscious-force which creates and governs the worlds and manifests itself in their works; it reveals the
Self-existent in his universal conscious-will as the Lord, the Ishwara. It enables us to unite our will with His, to
realise His will in the energies of all existences and to perceive the fulfilment of these energies of others as part
of our own universal self-fulfilment. Thus it removes the reality of strife and division and opposition and leaves
only their appearances. By that knowledge therefore we arrive at the possibility of a divine action, a working
which is personal to our nature, but impersonal to our being, since it proceeds from That which is beyond our ego
and acts only by its universal sanction. We proceed in our works with equality, without bondage to works and
their results, in unison with the Highest, in unison with
Page 424

the universal, free from separate responsibility for our acts and therefore unaffected by their reactions. This
which we have seen to be the fulfilment of the path of Works becomes thus an annexe and result of the path of
Knowledge.
\par The integral knowledge again reveals to us the Self-existent as the All-blissful who, as Sachchidananda
manifesting the world, manifesting all beings, accepts their adoration, even as He accepts their works of
aspiration and their seekings of knowledge, leans down to them and drawing them to Himself takes all into the
joy of His divine being. Knowing Him as our divine Self, we become one with Him, as the lover and beloved
become one, in the ecstasy of that embrace. Knowing Him too in all beings, perceiving the glory and beauty and
joy of the Beloved everywhere, we transform our souls into a passion of universal delight and a wideness and joy
of universal love. All this which, as we shall find, is the summit of the path of Devotion, becomes also an annexe
and result of the path of Knowledge.
\par Thus by the integral knowledge we unify all things in the One. We take up all the chords of the universal
music, strains sweet or discordant, luminous in their suggestion or obscure, powerful or faint, heard or
suppressed, and find them all changed and reconciled in the indivisible harmony of Sachchidananda. The
Knowledge brings also the Power and the Joy. “How shall he be deluded, whence shall he have sorrow who
sees everywhere the Oneness?”
Page 425

\par
\hn Chapter XVII
\par
\ht The Soul and Nature
\par\drop This is the result of the integral knowledge taken in its mass; its work is to gather up the different
strands of our being into the universal oneness. If we are to possess perfectly the world in our new divinised
consciousness as the Divine himself possesses it, we have to know also each thing in its absoluteness, first by
itself, secondly in its union with all that completes it; for so has the Divine imaged out and seen its being in the
world. To see things as parts, as incomplete elements is a lower analytic knowledge. The Absolute is
everywhere; it has to be seen and found everywhere. Every finite is an infinite and has to be known and sensed
in its intrinsic infiniteness as well as in its surface finite appearance. But so to know the world, so to perceive and
experience it, it is not enough to have an intellectual idea or imagination that so it is; a certain divine vision, divine
sense, divine ecstasy is needed, an experience of union of ourselves with the objects of our consciousness. In
that experience not only the Beyond but all here, not only the totality, the All in its mass, but each thing in the All
becomes to us our self, God, the Absolute and Infinite, Sachchidananda. This is the secret of complete delight in
God's world, complete satisfaction of the mind and heart and will, complete liberation of the consciousness. It is
the supreme experience at which art and poetry and all the various efforts of subjective and objective knowledge
and all desire and effort to possess and enjoy objects are trying more or less obscurely to arrive; their attempt to
seize the forms and properties and qualities of things is only a first movement which cannot give the deepest
satisfaction unless by seizing them perfectly and absolutely they get the sense of the infinite reality of which
these are the outer symbols. To the rational mind and the ordinary sense-experience this may well seem only a
poetic fancy or a mystic hallucination; but the absolute satisfaction
Page 426

and sense of illumination which it gives and alone can give is really a proof of its greater validity; we get by that a
ray from the higher consciousness and the diviner sense into which our subjective being is intended eventually, if
we will only allow it, to be transfigured.
\par We have seen that this applies to the highest principles of the Divine Being. Ordinarily, the discriminating
mind tells us that only what is beyond all manifestation is absolute, only the formless Spirit is infinite, only the
timeless, spaceless, immutable, immobile Self in its repose is absolutely real; and if we follow and are governed in
our endeavour by this conception, that is the subjective experience at which we shall arrive, all else seeming to us
false or only relatively true. But if we start from the larger conception, a completer truth and a wider experience
open to us. We perceive that the immutability of the timeless, spaceless existence is an absolute and an infinite,
but that also the conscious-force and the active delight of the divine Being in its all-blissful possession of the
outpouring of its powers, qualities, self-creations is an absolute and an infinite,—and indeed the same absolute
and infinite, so much the same that we can enjoy simultaneously, equally the divine timeless calm and peace and
the divine time-possessing joy of activity, freely, infinitely, without bondage or the lapse into unrest and suffering.
So too we can have the same experience of all the principles of this activity which in the Immutable are
self-contained and in a sense drawn in and concealed, in the cosmic are expressed and realise their infinite
quality and capacity.
\par The first of these principles in importance is the duality—which resolves itself into a unity—of Purusha and
Prakriti of which we have had occasion to speak in the Yoga of Works, but which is of equal importance for the
Yoga of Knowledge. This division was made most clearly by the old Indian philosophies; but it bases itself upon
the eternal fact of practical duality in unity upon which the world-manifestation is founded. It is given different
names according to our view of the universe. The Vedantins spoke of the Self and Maya, meaning according to
their predilections by the Self the Immutable and by Maya
Page 427

the power the Self has of imposing on itself the cosmic illusion, or by the Self the Divine Being and by Maya the
nature of conscious-being and the conscious-force by which the Divine embodies himself in soul-forms and
forms of things. Others spoke of Ishwara and Shakti, the Lord and His force, His cosmic power. The analytic
philosophy of the Sankhyas affirmed their eternal duality without any possibility of oneness, accepting only
relations of union and separation by which the cosmic action of Prakriti begins, proceeds or ceases for the
Purusha; for the Purusha is an inactive conscious existence,—it is the Soul the same in itself and immutable
forever,—Prakriti the active force of Nature which by its motion creates and maintains and by its sinking into
rest dissolves the phenomenon of the cosmos. Leaving aside these philosophical distinctions, we come to the
original psychological experience from which all really take their start, that there are two elements in the
existence of living beings, of human beings at least if not of all cosmos,—a dual being, Nature and the soul.
\par This duality is self-evident. Without any philosophy at all, by the mere force of experience it is what we can
all perceive, although we may not take the trouble to define. Even the most thoroughgoing materialism which
denies the soul or resolves it into a more or less illusory result of natural phenomena acting upon some
ill-explained phenomenon of the physical brain which we call consciousness or the mind, but which is really no
more than a sort of complexity of nervous spasms, cannot get rid of the practical fact of this duality. It does not
matter at all how it came about; the fact is not only there, it determines our whole existence, it is the one fact
which is really important to us as human beings with a will and an intelligence and a subjective existence which
makes all our happiness and our suffering. The whole problem of life resolves itself into this one
question,—“What are we to do with this soul and nature set face to face with each other,—we who have as one
side of our existence this Nature, this personal and cosmic activity, which tries to impress itself upon the soul, to
possess, control, determine it, and as the other side this soul which feels that in some mysterious way it has
Page 428

a freedom, a control over itself, a responsibility for what it is and does, and tries therefore to turn upon Nature, its
own and the world's, and to control, possess, enjoy, or even, it may be, reject and escape from her?” In order to
answer that question we have to know,—to know what the soul can do, to know what it can do with itself, to
know too what it can do with Nature and the world. The whole of human philosophy, religion, science is really
nothing but an attempt to get at the right data upon which it will be possible to answer the question and solve, as
satisfactorily as our knowledge will allow, the problem of our existence.
\par The hope of a complete escape from our present strife with and subjection to our lower and troubled nature
and existence arises when we perceive what religion and philosophy affirm, but modern thought has tried to
deny, that there are two poises of our soul-existence, a lower, troubled and subjected, a higher, supreme,
untroubled and sovereign, one vibrant in Mind, the other tranquil in Spirit. The hope not only of an escape, but of
a completely satisfying and victorious solution comes when we perceive what some religions and philosophies
affirm, but others seem to deny, that there is also in the dual unity of soul and nature a lower, an ordinary human
status and a higher, a divine; for it is in the divine alone that the conditions of the duality stand reversed; there the
soul becomes that which now it only struggles and aspires to be, master of its nature, free and by union with the
Divine possessor also of the world-nature. According to our idea of these possibilities will be the solution we shall
attempt to realise.
\par Involved in mind, possessed by the ordinary phenomenon of mental thought, sensation, emotion, reception of
the vital and physical impacts of the world and mechanical reaction to them, the soul is subject to Nature. Even
its will and intelligence are determined by its mental nature, determined even more largely by the mental nature
of its environment which acts upon, subtly as well as overtly, and overcomes the individual mentality. Thus its
attempt to regulate, to control, to determine its own experience and action is pursued by an element of illusion,
since when it thinks it is acting, it is really Nature that is acting and
Page 429

determining all it thinks, wills and does. If there were not this constant knowledge in it that it is, that it exists in
itself, is not the body or life but something other which at least receives and accepts the cosmic experience if it
does not determine it, it would be compelled in the end to suppose that Nature is all and the soul an illusion. This
is the conclusion modern Materialism affirms and to that nihilistic Buddhism arrived; the Sankhyas, perceiving the
dilemma, solved it by saying that the soul in fact only mirrors Nature's determinations and itself determines
nothing, is not the lord, but can by refusing to mirror them fall back into eternal immobility and peace. There are
too the other solutions which arrive at the same practical conclusion, but from the other end, the spiritual; for they
affirm either that Nature is an illusion or that both the soul and Nature are impermanent and they point us to a
state beyond in which their duality has no existence; either they cease by the extinction of both in something
permanent and ineffable or their discordances end by the exclusion of the active principle altogether. Though
they do not satisfy humanity's larger hope and deep-seated impulse and aspiration, these are valid solutions so far
as they go; for they arrive at an Absolute in itself or at the separate absolute of the soul, even if they reject the
many rapturous infinities of the Absolute which the true possession of Nature by the soul in its divine existence
offers to the eternal seeker in man.
\par Uplifted into the Spirit the soul is no longer subject to Nature; it is above this mental activity. It may be
above it in detachment and aloofness, \s{ud\=as\=ina}, seated above and indifferent, or attracted by and lost in the
absorbing peace or bliss of its undifferentiated, its concentrated spiritual experience of itself; we must then
transcend by a complete renunciation of Nature and cosmic existence, not conquer by a divine and sovereign
possession. But the Spirit, the Divine is not only above Nature; it is master of Nature and cosmos; the soul rising
into its spiritual poise must at least be capable of the same mastery by its unity with the Divine. It must be
capable of controlling its own nature not only in calm or by forcing it to repose, but with a sovereign control of its
play and activity.
Page 430

\par To arrive by an intense spirituality at the absolute of the soul is our possibility on one side of our dual
existence; to enjoy the absolute of Nature and of everything in Nature is our possibility on the other side of this
eternal duality. To unify these highest aspirations in a divine possession of God and ourselves and the world,
should be our happy completeness. In the lower poise this is not possible because the soul acts through the mind
and the mind can only act individually and fragmentarily in a contented obedience or a struggling subjection to
that universal Nature through which the divine knowledge and the divine Will are worked out in the cosmos. But
the Spirit is in possession of knowledge and will, of which it is the source and cause and not a subject; therefore
in proportion as the soul assumes its divine or spiritual being, it assumes also control of the movements of its
nature. It becomes, in the ancient language, Swarat, free and a self-ruler over the kingdom of its own life and
being. But also it increases in control over its environment, its world.
\par This it can only do entirely by universalising itself; for it is the divine and universal will that it must express in
its action upon the world. It must first extend its consciousness and see the universe in itself instead of being like
the mind limited by the physical, vital, sensational, emotional, intellectual outlook of the little divided personality. It
must accept the world-truths, the world-energies, the world-tendencies, the world-purposes as its own instead of
clinging to its own intellectual ideas, desires and endeavours, preferences, objects, intentions, impulses; these, so
far as they remain, must be harmonised with the universal. It must then submit its knowledge and will at their
very source to the divine Knowledge and the divine Will and so arrive through submission at immergence, losing
its personal light in the divine Light and its personal initiative in the divine initiative. To be first in tune with the
Infinite, in harmony with the Divine, and then to be unified with the Infinite, taken into the Divine is its condition
of perfect strength and mastery, and this is precisely the very nature of the spiritual life and the spiritual
existence.
\par The distinction made in the Gita between the Purusha and the Prakriti gives us the clue to the various
attitudes which the
Page 431

soul can adopt towards Nature in its movement towards perfect freedom and rule. The Purusha is, says the Gita,
witness, upholder, source of the sanction, knower, lord, enjoyer; Prakriti executes, it is the active principle and
must have an operation corresponding to the attitude of the Purusha. The soul may assume, if it wishes, the poise
of the pure witness, \s{s\=ak\,s\=i}; it may look on at the action of Nature as a thing from which it stands apart; it
watches, but does not itself participate. We have seen the importance of this quietistic capacity; it is the basis of
the movement of withdrawal by which we can say of everything,—body, life, mental action, thought, sensation,
emotion,—“This is Prakriti working in the life, mind and body, it is not myself, it is not even mine,” and thus come
to the soul's separation from these things and to their quiescence. This may, therefore, be an attitude of
renunciation or at least of non-participation, tamasic, with a resigned and inert endurance of the natural action so
long as it lasts, rajasic, with a disgust, aversion and recoil from it, sattwic, with a luminous intelligence of the
soul's separateness and the peace and joy of aloofness and repose; but also it may be attended by an equal and
impersonal delight as of a spectator at a show, joyous but unattached and ready to rise up at any moment and as
joyfully depart. The attitude of the Witness at its highest is the absolute of unattachment and freedom from
affection by the phenomena of the cosmic existence.
\par As the pure Witness, the soul refuses the function of upholder or sustainer of Nature. The upholder,
\s{bhart\=a}, is another, God or Force or Maya, but not the soul, which only admits the reflection of the natural
action upon its watching consciousness, but not any responsibility for maintaining or continuing it. It does not say
“All this is in me and maintained by me, an activity of my being,” but at the most “This is imposed on me, but
really external to myself.” Unless there is a clear and real duality in existence, this cannot be the whole truth of
the matter; the soul is the upholder also, it supports in its being the energy which unrolls the spectacle of the
cosmos and which conducts its energies. When the Purusha accepts this upholding, it may do it still passively and
without attachment, feeling that
Page 432

it contributes the energy, but not that it controls and determines it. The control is another, God or Force or the
very nature of Maya; the soul only upholds indifferently so long as it must, so long perhaps as the force of its past
sanction and interest in the energy continues and refuses to be exhausted. But if the attitude of the upholder is
fully accepted, an important step forward has been taken towards identification with the active Brahman and his
joy of cosmic being. For the Purusha has become the active giver of the sanction.
\par In the attitude of the Witness there is also a kind of sanction, but it is passive, inert and has no kind of
absoluteness about it; but if he consents entirely to uphold, the sanction has become active, even though the soul
may do no more than consent to reflect, support and thereby maintain in action all the energies of Prakriti. It may
refuse to determine, to select, believing that it is God or Force itself or some Knowledge-Will that selects and
determines, and the soul only a witness and upholder and thereby giver of the sanction, \s{anumant\=a}, but not the
possessor and the director of the knowledge and the will, \s{j\~n\=at\=a \=i\'svara\,h}. Then there is a general sanction in
the form of an active upholding of whatever is determined by God or universal Will, but there is not an active
determination. But if the soul habitually selects and rejects in what is offered to it, it determines; the relatively
passive has become an entirely active sanction and is on the way to be an active control.
\par This it becomes when the soul accepts its complete function as the knower, lord and enjoyer of Nature. As
the knower the soul possesses the knowledge of the force that acts and determines, it sees the values of being
which are realising themselves in cosmos, it is in the secret of Fate. For the force that acts is itself determined by
the knowledge which is its origin and the source and standardiser of its valuations and effectuations of values.
Therefore in proportion as the soul becomes again the knower, it gets the capacity of becoming also the
controller of the action whether by spiritual force alone or by that force figuring itself in mental and physical
activities. There may be in our soul life a perfect spiritual knowledge and understanding
Page 433

not only of all our internal activities but of all the unrolling of things, events, human, animal, natural activities
around us, the world-vision of the Rishi. This may not be attended by an active putting forth of power upon the
world, though that is seldom entirely absent; for the Rishi is not uninterested in the world or in his
fellow-creatures, but one with them by sympathy or by accepting all creatures as his own self in many minds and
bodies. The old forest-dwelling anchorites even are described continually as busily engaged in doing good to all
creatures. This can only be done in the spiritual realisation, not by an effort, for effort is a diminution of freedom,
but by a spiritual influence or by a spiritual mastery over the minds of men and the workings of Nature, which
reflects the divine effective immanence and the divine effective mastery.
\par Nor can it do this without becoming the active enjoyer, \s{bhokt\=a}. In the lower being the enjoyment is of a
twofold kind, positive and negative, which in the electricity of sensation translates itself into joy and suffering; but
in the higher it is an actively equal enjoyment of the divine delight in self-manifestation. That enjoyment again
may be limited to a silent spiritual delight or an integral divine joy possessing all things around us and all activities
of all parts of our being.
\par There is no loss of freedom, no descent into an ignorant attachment. The man free in his soul is aware that
the Divine is the lord of the action of Nature, that Maya is His Knowledge-Will determining and effecting all, that
Force is the Will side of this double divine Power in which knowledge is always present and effectual. He is
aware of himself also, even individually, as a centre of the divine existence,—a portion of the Lord, the Gita
expresses it,—controlling so far the action of Nature which he views, upholds, sanctions, enjoys, knows and by
the determinative power of knowledge controls. And when he universalises himself, his knowledge still reflects
only the divine knowledge, his will effectuates only the divine will, he enjoys only the divine delight and not an
ignorant personal satisfaction. Thus the Purusha preserves its freedom in its possession, renunciation of limited
personality even in its representative enjoyment and
Page 434

\NH delight of cosmic being. It has taken up fully in the higher poise the true relations of the soul and Nature.
\par Purusha and Prakriti in their union and duality arise from the being of Sachchidananda. Self-conscious
existence is the essential nature of the Being; that is Sat or Purusha. The Power of self-aware existence,
whether drawn into itself or acting in the works of its consciousness and force, its knowledge and its will, Chit
and Tapas, Chit and its Shakti,—that is Prakriti. Delight of being, Ananda, is the eternal truth of the union of this
conscious being and its conscious force whether absorbed in itself or else deployed in the inseparable duality of
its two aspects. It unrolls the worlds as Prakriti and views them as Purusha; acts in them and upholds the action;
executes works and gives the sanction without which the force of Nature cannot act; executes and controls the
knowledge and the will and knows and controls the determinations of the knowledge-force and will-force;
ministers to the enjoyment and enjoys;—all is the Soul possessor, observer, knower, lord of Nature and Nature
expressing the being, executing the will, satisfying the self-knowledge, ministering to the delight of being of the
soul. There we have, founded on the very nature of being, the supreme and the universal relation of Prakriti with
Purusha. The relation in its imperfect, perverted or reverse terms is the world as we see it; but the perfect
relation brings the absolute joy of the soul in itself and, based upon that, the absolute joy of the soul in Nature
which is the divine fulfilment of world-existence.
Page 435

\par
\hn Chapter XVIII
\par
\ht The Soul and Its Liberation
\par\drop We have now to pause and consider to what this acceptance of the relations of Purusha and Prakriti
commits us; for it means that the Yoga which we are pursuing has for end none of the ordinary aims of
humanity. It neither accepts our earthly existence as it is, nor can be satisfied with some kind of moral perfection
or religious ecstasy, with a heaven beyond or with some dissolution of our being by which we get satisfactorily
done with the trouble of existence. Our aim becomes quite other; it is to live in the Divine, the Infinite, in God and
not in any mere egoism and temporality, but at the same time not apart from Nature, from our fellow-beings,
from earth and the mundane existence, any more than the Divine lives aloof from us and the world. He exists
also in relation to the world and Nature and all these beings, but with an absolute and inalienable power, freedom
and self-knowledge. Our liberation and perfection is to transcend ignorance, bondage and weakness and live in
Him in relation to the world and Nature with the divine power, freedom and self-knowledge. For the highest
relation of the Soul to existence is the Purusha's possession of Prakriti, when he is no longer ignorant and subject
to his nature, but knows, transcends, enjoys and controls his manifested being and determines largely and freely
what shall be his self-expression.
\par A oneness finding itself out in the variations of its own duality is the whole play of the soul with Nature in its
cosmic birth and becoming. One Sachchidananda everywhere, self-existent, illimitable, a unity indestructible by
the utmost infinity of its own variations, is the original truth of being for which our knowledge seeks and to that
our subjective existence eventually arrives. From that all other truths arise, upon that they are based, by that they
are at every moment made possible and in that they in the end can know themselves and each other, are
reconciled,
Page 436

harmonised and justified. All relations in the world, even to its greatest and most shocking apparent discords, are
relations of something eternal to itself in its own universal existence; they are not anywhere or at any time
collisions of disconnected beings who meet fortuitously or by some mechanical necessity of cosmic existence.
Therefore to get back to this eternal fact of oneness is our essential act of self-knowledge; to live in it must be
the effective principle of our inner possession of our being and of our right and ideal relations with the world.
That is why we have had to insist first and foremost on oneness as the aim and in a way the whole aim of our
Yoga of knowledge.
\par But this unity works itself out everywhere and on every plane by an executive or practical truth of duality.
The Eternal is the one infinite conscious Existence, Purusha, and not something inconscient and mechanical; it
exists eternally in its delight of the force of its own conscious being founded in an equilibrium of unity; but it
exists also in the no less eternal delight of its force of conscious being at play with various creative
self-experience in the universe. Just as we ourselves are or can become aware of being always something
timeless, nameless, perpetual which we call our self and which constitutes the unity of all that we are, and yet
simultaneously we have the various experience of what we do, think, will, create, become, such too is the
self-awareness of this Purusha in the world. Only we, being at present limited and ego-bound mental individuals,
have usually this experience in the ignorance and do not live in the self, but only look back at it or draw back to it
from time to time, while the Eternal has it in His infinite self-knowledge, is eternally this self and looks from the
fullness of self-being at all this self-experience. He does not like us, bound prisoners of the mind, conceive of His
being as either a sort of indefinite result and sum or else a high contradiction of self-experience. The old
philosophical quarrel between Being and Becoming is not possible to the eternal self-knowledge.
\par An active force of conscious-being which realises itself in its powers of self-experience, its powers of
knowledge, will, self-delight, self-formulation with all their marvellous variations, inversions, conservations and
conversions of energy, even
Page 437

\NH perversions, is what we call Prakriti or Nature, in ourselves as in the cosmos. But behind this force of
variation is the eternal equilibrium of the same force in an equal unity which supports impartially, governs even as
it has originated the variations and directs them to whatever aim of its self-delight the Being, the Purusha, has
conceived in its consciousness and determined by its will or power of consciousness. That is the divine Nature
into unity with which we have to get back by our Yoga of self-knowledge. We have to become the Purusha,
Sachchidananda, delighting in a divine individual possession of its Prakriti and no longer mental beings subject to
our egoistic nature. For that is the real man, the supreme and integral self of the individual, and the ego is only a
lower and partial manifestation of ourselves through which a certain limited and preparatory experience becomes
possible and is for a time indulged. But this indulgence of the lower being is not our whole possibility; it is not the
sole or crowning experience for which we exist as human beings even in this material world.
\par This individual being of ours is that by which ignorance is possible to self-conscious mind, but it is also that
by which liberation into the spiritual being is possible and the enjoyment of divine immortality. It is not the Eternal
in His transcendence or in His cosmic being who arrives at this immortality; it is the individual who rises into
self-knowledge, in him it is possessed and by him it is made effective. All life, spiritual, mental or material, is the
play of the soul with the possibilities of its nature; for without this play there can be no self-expression and no
relative self-experience. Even, then, in our realisation of all as our larger self and in our oneness with God and
other beings, this play can and must persist, unless we desire to cease from all self-expression and all but a
tranced and absorbed self-experience. But then it is in the individual being that this trance or this liberated play is
realised; the trance is this mental being's immersion in the sole experience of unity, the liberated play is the taking
up of his mind into the spiritual being for the free realisation and delight of oneness. For the nature of the divine
existence is to possess always its unity, but to possess it also in
Page 438

an infinite experience, from many standpoints, on many planes, through many conscious powers or selves of
itself, individualities—in our limited intellectual language—of the one conscious being. Each one of us is one of
these individualities. To stand away from God in limited ego, limited mind is to stand away from ourselves, to be
unpossessed of our true individuality, to be the apparent and not the real individual; it is our power of ignorance.
To be taken up into the divine Being and be aware of our spiritual, infinite and universal consciousness as that in
which we now live, is to possess our supreme and integral self, our true individuality; it is our power of
self-knowledge.
\par By knowing the eternal unity of these three powers of the eternal manifestation, God, Nature and the
individual self, and their intimate necessity to each other, we come to understand existence itself and all that in
the appearances of the world now puzzles our ignorance. Our self-knowledge abolishes none of these things, it
abolishes only our ignorance and those circumstances proper to the ignorance which made us bound and subject
to the egoistic determinations of our nature. When we get back to our true being, the ego falls away from us; its
place is taken by our supreme and integral self, the true individuality. As this supreme self it makes itself one
with all beings and sees all world and Nature in its own infinity. What we mean by this is simply that our sense of
separate existence disappears into a consciousness of illimitable, undivided, infinite being in which we no longer
feel bound to the name and form and the particular mental and physical determinations of our present birth and
becoming and are no longer separate from anything or anyone in the universe. This was what the ancient
thinkers called the Non-birth or the destruction of birth or Nirvana. At the same time we continue to live and act
through our individual birth and becoming, but with a different knowledge and quite another kind of experience;
the world also continues, but we see it in our own being and not as something external to it and other than
ourselves. To be able to live permanently in this new consciousness of our real, our integral being is to attain
liberation and enjoy immortality.
Page 439

\par Here there comes in the complication of the idea that immortality is only possible after death in other worlds,
upon higher planes of existence or that liberation must destroy all possibility of mental or bodily living and
annihilate the individual existence for ever in an impersonal infinity. These ideas derive their strength from a
certain justification in experience and a sort of necessity or upward attraction felt by the soul when it shakes off
the compelling ties of mind and matter. It is felt that these ties are inseparable from all earthly living or from all
mental existence. Death is the king of the material world, for life seems to exist here only by submission to death,
by a constant dying; immortality has to be conquered here with difficulty and seems to be in its nature a rejection
of all death and therefore of all birth into the material world. The field of immortality must be in some immaterial
plane, in some heavens where either the body does not exist or else is different and only a form of the soul or a
secondary circumstance. On the other hand, it is felt by those who would go beyond immortality even, that all
planes and heavens are circumstances of the finite existence and the infinite self is void of all these things. They
are dominated by a necessity to disappear into the impersonal and infinite and an inability to equate in any way
the bliss of impersonal being with the soul's delight in its becoming. Philosophies have been invented which justify
to the intellect this need of immersion and disappearance; but what is really important and decisive is the call of
the Beyond, the need of the soul, its delight—in this case—in a sort of impersonal existence or non-existence.
For what decides is the determining delight of the Purusha, the relation which it wills to establish with its Prakriti,
the experience at which it arrives as the result of the line it has followed in the development of its individual
self-experience among all the various possibilities of its nature. Our intellectual justifications are only the account
of that experience which we give to the reason and the devices by which we help the mind to assent to the
direction in which the soul is moving.
\par The cause of our world-existence is not, as our present experience induces us to believe, the ego; for the
ego is only a
Page 440

result and a circumstance of our mode of world-existence. It is a relation which the many-souled Purusha has set
up between individualised minds and bodies, a relation of self-defence and mutual exclusion and aggression in
order to have among all the dependences of things in the world upon each other a possibility of independent
mental and physical experience. But there can be no absolute independence upon these planes; impersonality
which rejects all mental and physical becoming is therefore the only possible culmination of this exclusive
movement: so only can an absolutely independent self-experience be achieved. The soul then seems to exist
absolutely, independently in itself; it is free in the sense of the Indian word, \s{sv\=adh\=ina}, dependent only on itself,
not dependent upon God and other beings. Therefore in this experience God, personal self and other beings are
all denied, cast away as distinctions of the ignorance. It is the ego recognising its own insufficiency and
abolishing both itself and its contraries that its own essential instinct of independent self-experience may be
accomplished; for it finds that its effort to achieve it by relations with God and others is afflicted throughout with
a sentence of illusion, vanity and nullity. It ceases to admit them because by admitting them it becomes
dependent on them; it ceases to admit its own persistence, because the persistence of ego means the admission
of that which it tries to exclude as not-self, of the cosmos and other beings. The self-annihilation of the Buddhist
is in its nature absolute exclusion of all that the mental being perceives; the self-immersion of the Adwaitin in his
absolute being is the self-same aim differently conceived: both are a supreme self-assertion of the soul of its
exclusive independence of Prakriti.
\par The experience which we first arrive at by the sort of short-cut to liberation which we have described as the
movement of withdrawal, assists this tendency. For it is a breaking of the ego and a rejection of the habits of the
mentality we now possess; for that is subject to matter and the physical senses and conceives of things only as
forms, objects, external phenomena and as names which we attach to those forms. We are not aware directly of
the subjective life of other beings except by analogy from our
Page 441

own and by inference or derivative perception based upon their external signs of speech, action, etc., which our
minds translate into the terms of our own subjectivity. When we break out from ego and physical mind into the
infinity of the spirit, we still see the world and others as the mind has accustomed us to see them, as names and
forms; only in our new experience of the direct and superior reality of spirit, they lose that direct objective reality
and that indirect subjective reality of their own which they had to the mind. They seem to be quite the opposite of
the truer reality we now experience; our mentality, stilled and indifferent, no longer strives to know and make
real to itself those intermediate terms which exist in them as in us and the knowledge of which has for its utility
to bridge over the gulf between the spiritual self and the objective phenomena of the world. We are satisfied with
the blissful infinite impersonality of a pure spiritual existence; nothing else and nobody else any longer matters to
us. What the physical senses show to us and what the mind perceives and conceives about them and so
imperfectly and transiently delights in, seems now unreal and worthless; we are not and do not care to be in
possession of the intermediate truths of being through which these things are enjoyed by the One and possess for
Him that value of His being and delight which makes, as we might say, cosmic existence a thing beautiful to Him
and worth manifesting. We can no longer share in God's delight in the world; on the contrary it looks to us as if
the Eternal had degraded itself by admitting into the purity of its being the gross nature of Matter or had falsified
the truth of its being by imagining vain names and unreal forms. Or else if we perceive at all that delight, it is with
a far-off detachment which prevents us from participating in it with any sense of intimate possession, or it is with
an attraction to the superior delight of an absorbed and exclusive self-experience which does not allow us to stay
any longer in these lower terms than we are compelled to stay by the continuance of our physical life and body.
\par But if either in the course of our Yoga or as the result of a free return of our realised Self upon the world
and a free repossession of its Prakriti by the Purusha in us, we become
Page 442

conscious not only of the bodies and outward self-expression of others, but intimately of their inner being, their
minds, their souls and that in them of which their own surface minds are not aware, then we see the real Being in
them also and we see them as selves of our Self and not as mere names and forms. They become to us realities
of the Eternal. Our minds are no longer subject to the delusion of trivial unworthiness or the illusion of unreality.
The material life loses indeed for us its old absorbing value, but finds the greater value which it has for the divine
Purusha; regarded no longer as the sole term of our becoming, but as merely having a subordinate value in
relation to the higher terms of mind and spirit, it increases by that diminution instead of losing in value. We see
that our material being, life, nature are only one poise of the Purusha in relation to its Prakriti and that their true
purpose and importance can only be appreciated when they are seen not as a thing in itself, but as dependent on
higher poises by which they are supported; from those superior relations they derive their meaning and, therefore,
by conscious union with them they can fulfil all their valid tendencies and aims. Life then becomes justified to us
and no longer stultified by the possession of liberated self-knowledge.
\par This larger integral knowledge and freedom liberates in the end and fulfils our whole existence. When we
possess it, we see why our existence moves between these three terms of God, ourselves and the world; we no
longer see them or any of them in opposition to each other, inconsistent, incompatible, nor do we on the other
hand regard them as terms of our ignorance which all disappear at last into a pure impersonal unity. We perceive
their necessity as terms rather of our self-fulfilment which preserve their value after liberation or rather find then
only their real value. We have no longer the experience of our existence as exclusive of the other existences
which make up by our relations with them our experience of the world; in this new consciousness they are all
contained in ourselves and we in them. They and we are no longer so many mutually exclusive egos each
seeking its own independent fulfilment or self-transcendence and ultimately aiming at nothing else; they are all
the Eternal and the self in
Page 443

each secretly embraces all in itself and seeks in various ways to make that higher truth of its unity apparent and
effective in its terrestrial being. Not mutual exclusiveness, but mutual inclusiveness is the divine truth of our
individuality, love the higher law and not an independent self-fulfilment.
\par The Purusha who is our real being is always independent and master of Prakriti and at this independence we
are rightly seeking to arrive; that is the utility of the egoistic movement and its self-transcendence, but its right
fulfilment is not in making absolute the ego's principle of independent existence, but in arriving at this other
highest poise of the Purusha with regard to its Prakriti. There there is transcendence of Nature, but also
possession of Nature, perfect fulfilment of our individuality, but also perfect fulfilment of our relations with the
world and with others. Therefore an individual salvation in heavens beyond careless of the earth is not our
highest objective; the liberation and self-fulfilment of others is as much our own concern,—we might almost say,
our divine self-interest,—as our own liberation. Otherwise our unity with others would have no effective
meaning. To conquer the lures of egoistic existence in this world is our first victory over ourselves; to conquer
the lure of individual happiness in heavens beyond is our second victory; to conquer the highest lure of escape
from life and a self-absorbed bliss in the impersonal infinity is the last and greatest victory. Then are we rid of all
individual exclusiveness and possessed of our entire spiritual freedom.
\par The state of the liberated soul is that of the Purusha who is for ever free. Its consciousness is a
transcendence and an all-comprehending unity. Its self-knowledge does not get rid of all the terms of
self-knowledge, but unifies and harmonises all things in God and in the divine nature. The intense religious
ecstasy which knows only God and ourselves and shuts out all else, is only to it an intimate experience which
prepares it for sharing in the embrace of the divine Love and Delight around all creatures. A heavenly bliss
which unites God and ourselves and the blest, but enables us to look with a remote indifference on the unblest
and their sufferings is not possible to the perfect
Page 444

soul; for these also are its selves; free individually from suffering and ignorance, it must naturally turn to draw
them also towards its freedom. On the other hand any absorption in the relations between self and others and the
world to the exclusion of God and the Beyond is still more impossible, and therefore it cannot be limited by the
earth or even by the highest and most altruistic relations of man with man. Its activity or its culmination is not to
efface and utterly deny itself for the sake of others, but to fulfil itself in God-possession, freedom and divine bliss
that in and by its fulfilment others too may be fulfilled. For it is in God alone, by the possession of the Divine only
that all the discords of life can be resolved, and therefore the raising of men towards the Divine is in the end the
one effective way of helping mankind. All the other activities and realisations of our self-experience have their
use and power, but in the end these crowded side-tracks or these lonely paths must circle round to converge into
the wideness of the integral way by which the liberated soul transcends all, embraces all and becomes the
promise and the power of the fulfilment of all in their manifested being of the Divine.
Page 445

\par
\hn Chapter XIX
\par
\ht The Planes of Our Existence
\par\drop If the Purusha in us has thus to become by union with its highest self, the Divine Purusha, the knower,
lord, free enjoyer of its Prakriti, it cannot be done, evidently, by dwelling on the present plane of our being; for
that is the material plane in which the reign of Prakriti is complete; there the divine Purusha is entirely hidden in
the blinding surge of her activities, in the gross pomp of her workings, and the individual soul emerging from her
involution of spirit in matter, subject in all its activities to its entangling in the material and vital instruments is
unable to experience the divine freedom. What it calls its freedom and mastery, is only the subtle subjection of
mind to Prakriti which is lighter indeed, nearer to the possibility of liberty and rule than the gross subjection of
vital and material things like the animal, plant and metal, but is still not real freedom and mastery. Therefore we
have had to speak of different planes of our consciousness and of the spiritual planes of the mental being; for if
these did not exist, the liberation of the embodied being would have been impossible here on earth. He would
have had to wait and at most to prepare himself for seeking it in other worlds and in a different kind of physical
or spiritual embodiment less obstinately sealed in its shell of material experience.
\par In the ordinary Yoga of knowledge it is only necessary to recognise two planes of our consciousness, the
spiritual and the materialised mental; the pure reason standing between these two views them both, cuts through
the illusions of the phenomenal world, exceeds the materialised mental plane, sees the reality of the spiritual; and
then the will of the individual Purusha unifying itself with this poise of knowledge rejects the lower and draws
back to the supreme plane, dwells there, loses mind and body, sheds life from it and merges itself in the supreme
Purusha, is delivered from individual existence. It knows that
Page 446

this is not the whole truth of our existence, which is much more complex; it knows there are many planes, but it
disregards them or pays little attention to them because they are not essential to this liberation. They indeed
rather hamper it, because to live on them brings new attractive psychical experiences, psychical enjoyments,
psychical powers, a new world of phenomenal knowledge the pursuit of which creates stumbling-blocks in the
way of its one object, immergence in Brahman, and brings a succession of innumerable way-side snares on the
road which leads to God. But since we accept world-existence, and for us all world-existence is Brahman and
full of the presence of God, these things can have no terrors for us; whatever dangers of distraction there may
be, we have to face and overcome them. If the world and our own existence are so complex, we must know and
embrace their complexities in order that our self-knowledge and our knowledge of the dealings of Purusha with
its Prakriti may be complete. If there are many planes, we have to possess them all for the Divine, even as we
seek to possess spiritually and transform our ordinary poise of mind, life and body.
\par The ancient knowledge in all countries was full of the search after the hidden truths of our being and it
created that large field of practice and inquiry which goes in Europe by the name of occultism,—we do not use
any corresponding word in the East, because these things do not seem to us so remote, mysterious and abnormal
as to the occidental mentality; they are nearer to us and the veil between our normal material life and this larger
life is much thinner. In India,
\note{ For example, the Tantric in India.} Egypt, Chaldea, China, Greece, the Celtic countries they have formed
part of various Yogic systems and disciplines which had once a great hold everywhere, but to the modern mind
have seemed mere superstition and mysticism, although the facts and experiences on which they are founded are
quite as real in their own field and as much governed by intelligible laws of their own as the facts and
experiences of the material world. It is not our intention here to plunge into this
Page 447

vast and difficult field of psychical knowledge.
\note{ We hope to deal with it hereafter; but our first concern in the {\it Arya} must be with spiritual and
philosophical truths; it is only when these have been grasped that the approach to the psychical becomes safe
and clear.} But it becomes necessary now to deal with certain broad facts and principles which form its
framework, for without them our Yoga of knowledge cannot be complete. We find that in the various systems
the facts dealt with are always the same, but there are considerable differences of theoretic and practical
arrangement, as is natural and inevitable in dealing with a subject so large and difficult. Certain things are here
omitted, there made all-important, here understressed, there over-emphasised; certain fields of experience which
are in one system held to be merely subordinate provinces, are in others treated as separate kingdoms. But I shall
follow here consistently the Vedic and Vedantic arrangement of which we find the great lines in the Upanishads,
first because it seems to me at once the simplest and most philosophical and more especially because it was from
the beginning envisaged from the point of view of the utility of these various planes to the supreme object of our
liberation. It takes as its basis the three principles of our ordinary being, mind, life and matter, the triune spiritual
principle of Sachchidananda and the link principle of \s{vij\~n\=ana}, supermind, the free or spiritual intelligence, and
thus arranges all the large possible poises of our being in a tier of seven planes,—sometimes regarded as five
only, because, only the lower five are wholly accessible to us,—through which the developing being can rise to its
perfection.
\par But first we must understand what we mean by planes of consciousness, planes of existence. We mean a
general settled poise or world of relations between Purusha and Prakriti, between the Soul and Nature. For
anything that we can call world is and can be nothing else than the working out of a general relation which a
universal existence has created or established between itself, or let us say its eternal fact or potentiality and the
powers of its becoming. That existence in its relations with and its experience of the becoming is what we call
soul or Purusha,
Page 448

individual soul in the individual, universal soul in the cosmos; the principle and the powers of the becoming are
what we call Nature or Prakriti. But since Being, conscious force and delight of being are always the three
constituent terms of existence, the nature of a world is really determined by the way in which Prakriti is set to
deal with these three primary things and the forms which it is allowed to give to them. For existence itself is and
must always be the stuff of its own becoming; it must be shaped into the substance with which Force has to deal.
Force again must be the power which works out that substance and works with it to whatever ends; Force is that
which we ordinarily call Nature. Again the end, the object with which the worlds are created must be worked out
by the consciousness inherent in all existence and all force and all their workings, and the object must be the
possession of itself and of its delight of existence in the world. To that all the circumstances and aims of any
world-existence must reduce themselves; it is existence developing its terms of being, its power of being, its
conscious delight of being; if these are involved, their evolution; if they are veiled, their self-revelation.
\par Here the soul lives in a material universe; of that alone it is immediately conscious; the realisation of its
potentialities in that is the problem with which it is concerned. But matter means the involution of the conscious
delight of existence in self-oblivious force and in a self-dividing, infinitesimally disaggregated form of substance.
Therefore the whole principle and effort of a material world must be the evolution of what is involved and the
development of what is undeveloped. Here everything is shut up from the first in the violently working
inconscient sleep of material force; therefore the whole aim of any material becoming must be the waking of
consciousness out of the inconscient; the whole consummation of a material becoming must be the removal of
the veil of matter and the luminous revelation of the entirely self-conscient Being to its own imprisoned soul in the
becoming. Since Man is such an imprisoned soul, this luminous liberation and coming to self-knowledge must be
his highest object and the condition of his perfection.
Page 449

\par But the limitations of a material universe seem to be hostile to the proper accomplishment of this object
which is yet so inevitably the highest aim of a mental being born into a physical body. First existence has formed
itself here, fundamentally, as Matter; it has been objectivised, made sensible and concrete to its own
self-experiencing conscious-force in the form of self-dividing material substance, and by the aggregation of this
matter there has been built up for man a physical body separate, divided from others and subject to the fixed
habits of process or, as we call them, the laws of inconscient material Nature. His force of being too is nature or
Force working in matter, which has waked slowly out of inconscience to life and is always limited by form,
always dependent on the body, always separated by it from the rest of Life and from other living beings, always
hampered in its development, persistence, self-perfectioning by the laws of the Inconscience and the limitations
of bodily living. Equally, his consciousness is a mentality emerging in a body and in a sharply individualised life; it
is therefore limited in its workings and capacities and dependent on bodily organs of no great competence and on
a very restricted vital force; it is separated from the rest of cosmic mind and shut out from the thoughts of other
mental beings whose inner workings are a sealed book to man's physical mind except in so far as he can read
them by the analogy of his own mentality and by their insufficient bodily signs and self-expressions. His
consciousness is always falling back towards the inconscience in which a large part of it is always involved, his
life towards death, his physical being towards disaggregation. His delight of being depends on the relations of this
imperfect consciousness with its environment based upon physical sensations and the sense-mind, in other words
on a limited mind trying to lay hold on a world external and foreign to it by means of a limited body, limited vital
force, limited organs. Therefore its power for possession is limited, its force for delight is limited, and every touch
of the world which exceeds its force, which that force cannot bear, cannot seize on, cannot assimilate and
possess must turn to something else than delight, to pain, discomfort or grief. Or else it must
Page 450

be met by non-reception, insensibility, or, if received, put away by indifference. Moreover such delight of being
as it possesses, is not possessed naturally and eternally like the self-delight of Sachchidananda, but by experience
and acquisition in Time, and can therefore only be maintained and prolonged by repetition of experience and is in
its nature precarious and transient.
\par All this means that the natural relations of Purusha to Prakriti in the material universe are the complete
absorption of conscious being in the force of its workings, therefore the complete self-oblivion and self-ignorance
of the Purusha, the complete domination of Prakriti and subjection of the soul to Nature. The soul does not know
itself, it only knows, if anything, the workings of Prakriti. The emergence of the individual self-conscious soul in
Man does not of itself abrogate these primary relations of ignorance and subjection. For this soul is living on a
material plane of existence, a poise of Prakriti in which matter is still the chief determinant of its relations to
Nature, and its consciousness being limited by Matter cannot be an entirely self-possessing consciousness. Even
the universal soul, if limited by the material formula, could not be in entire possession of itself; much less can the
individual soul to which the rest of existence becomes by bodily, vital and mental limitation and separation
something external to it on which it is yet dependent for its life and its delight and its knowledge. These limitations
of his power, knowledge, life, delight of existence are the whole cause of man's dissatisfaction with himself and
the universe. And if the material universe were all and the material plane the only plane of his being, then man
the individual Purusha could never arrive at perfection and self-fulfilment or indeed to any other life than that of
the animals. There must be either worlds in which he is liberated from these incomplete and unsatisfactory
relations of Purusha with Prakriti, or planes of his own being by ascending to which he can transcend them, or at
the very least planes, worlds and higher beings from which he can receive or be helped to knowledge, powers,
joys, a growth of his being otherwise impossible. All these things, the ancient knowledge asserts, exist,—other
worlds, higher planes, the possibility of
Page 451

communication, of ascension, of growth by contact with and influence from that which is above him in the
present scale of his realised being.
\par As there is a poise of the relations of Purusha with Prakriti in which Matter is the first determinant, a world
of material existence, so there is another just above it in which Matter is not supreme, but rather Life-force takes
its place as the first determinant. In this world forms do not determine the conditions of the life, but it is life which
determines the form, and therefore forms are there much more free, fluid, largely and to our conceptions
strangely variable than in the material world. This life-force is not inconscient material force, not even, except in
its lowest movements, an elemental subconscient energy, but a conscious force of being which makes for
formation, but much more essentially for enjoyment, possession, satisfaction of its own dynamic impulse. Desire
and the satisfaction of impulse are therefore the first law of this world of sheer vital existence, this poise of
relations between the soul and its nature in which the life-power plays with so much greater a freedom and
capacity than in our physical living; it may be called the desire-world, for that is its principal characteristic.
Moreover, it is not fixed in one hardly variable formula as physical life seems to be, but is capable of many
variations of its poise, admits many sub-planes ranging from those which touch material existence and, as it were,
melt into that, to those which touch at the height of the life-power the planes of pure mental and psychic
existence and melt into them. For in Nature in the infinite scale of being there are no wide gulfs, no abrupt
chasms to be overleaped, but a melting of one thing into another, a subtle continuity; out of that her power of
distinctive experience creates the orderings, the definite ranges, the distinct gradations by which the soul
variously knows and possesses its possibilities of world-existence. Again, enjoyment of one kind or another being
the whole object of desire, that must be the trend of the desire-world; but since wherever the soul is not
free,—and it cannot be free when subject to desire,—there must be the negative as well as the positive of all its
experience, this world contains not only the possibility of large or intense
Page 452

or continuous enjoyments almost inconceivable to the limited physical mind, but also the possibility of equally
enormous sufferings. It is here therefore that there are situated the lowest heavens and all the hells with the
tradition and imagination of which the human mind has lured and terrified itself since the earliest ages. All human
imaginations indeed correspond to some reality or real possibility, though they may in themselves be a quite
inaccurate representation or couched in too physical images and therefore inapt to express the truth of
supraphysical realities.
\par Nature being a complex unity and not a collection of unrelated phenomena, there can be no unbridgeable
gulf between the material existence and this vital or desire world. On the contrary, they may be said in a sense to
exist in each other and are at least interdependent to a certain extent. In fact, the material world is really a sort
of projection from the vital, a thing which it has thrown out and separated from itself in order to embody and fulfil
some of its desires under conditions other than its own, which are yet the logical result of its own most material
longings. Life on earth may be said to be the result of the pressure of this life-world on the material, inconscient
existence of the physical universe. Our own manifest vital being is also only a surface result of a larger and
profounder vital being which has its proper seat on the life-plane and through which we are connected with the
life-world. Moreover, the life-world is constantly acting upon us and behind everything in material existence there
stand appropriate powers of the life-world; even the most crude and elemental have behind them elemental
life-powers, elemental beings by which or by whom they are supported. The influences of the life-world are
always pouring out on the material existence and producing there their powers and results which return again
upon the life-world to modify it. From that the life-part of us, the desire-part is being always touched and
influenced; there too are beneficent and malefic powers of good desire and evil desire which concern themselves
with us even when we are ignorant of and unconcerned with them. Nor are these powers merely tendencies,
inconscient forces, nor, except on the verges
Page 453

of Matter, subconscient, but conscious powers, beings, living influences. As we awaken to the higher planes of
our existence, we become aware of them as friends or enemies, powers which seek to possess or which we can
master, overcome, pass beyond and leave behind. It is this possible relation of the human being with the powers
of the life-world which occupied to so large an extent European occultism, especially in the Middle Ages, as well
as certain forms of Eastern magic and spiritualism. The “superstitions” of the past—much superstition there was,
that is to say, much ignorant and distorted belief, false explanations and obscure and clumsy dealing with the laws
of the beyond,—had yet behind them truths which a future Science, delivered from its sole preoccupation with
the material world, may rediscover. For the supra-material is as much a reality as the existence of mental beings
in the material universe.
\par But why then are we not normally aware of so much that is behind us and always pressing upon us? For the
same reason that we are not aware of the inner life of our neighbour, although it exists as much as our own and
is constantly exercising an occult influence upon us,—for a great part of our thoughts and feelings come into us
from outside, from our fellow-men, both from individuals and from the collective mind of humanity; and for the
same reason that we are not aware of the greater part of our own being which is subconscient or subliminal to
our waking mind and is always influencing and in an occult manner determining our surface existence. It is
because we use, normally, only our corporeal senses and live almost wholly in the body and the physical vitality
and the physical mind, and it is not directly through these that the life-world enters into relations with us. That is
done through other sheaths of our being,—so they are termed in the Upanishads,—other bodies, as they are
called in a later terminology, the mental sheath or subtle body in which our true mental being lives and the life
sheath or vital body which is more closely connected with the physical or food-sheath and forms with it the gross
body of our complex existence. These possess powers, senses, capacities which are always secretly acting in us,
are connected with and impinge upon our physical
Page 454

organs and the plexuses of our physical life and mentality. By self-development we can become aware of them,
possess our life in them, get through them into conscious relation with the life-world and other worlds and use
them also for a more subtle experience and more intimate knowledge of the truths, facts and happenings of even
the material world itself. We can by this self-development live more or less fully on planes of our existence other
than the material which is now all in all to us.
\par What has been said of the life-world applies with the necessary differences to still higher planes of the
cosmic existence. For beyond that is a mental plane, a world of mental existence in which neither life, nor matter,
but mind is the first determinant. Mind there is not determined by material conditions or by the life-force, but
itself determines and uses them for its own satisfaction. There mind, that is to say, the psychical and the
intellectual being, is free in a certain sense, free at least to satisfy and fulfil itself in a way hardly conceivable to
our body-bound and life-bound mentality; for the Purusha there is the pure mental being and his relations with
Prakriti are determined by that purer mentality, Nature there is mental rather than vital and physical. Both the
life-world and indirectly the material are a projection from that, the result of certain tendencies of the mental
Being which have sought a field, conditions, an arrangement of harmonies proper to themselves; and the
phenomena of mind in this world may be said to be a result of the pressure of that plane first on the life-world
and then on life in the material existence. By its modification in the life-world it creates in us the desire-mind; in
its own right it awakes in us the purer powers of our psychical and intellectual existence. But our surface
mentality is only a secondary result of a larger subliminal mentality whose proper seat is the mental plane. This
world of mental existence also is constantly acting upon us and our world, has its powers and its beings, is related
to us through our mental body. There we find the psychical and mental heavens to which the Purusha can
ascend when it drops this physical body and can there sojourn till the impulse to terrestrial existence again draws
it downward. Here too are many planes, the lowest
Page 455

\NH converging upon and melting into the worlds below, the highest at the heights of the mind-power into the
worlds of a more spiritual existence.
\par These highest worlds are therefore supramental; they belong to the principle of supermind, the free, spiritual
or divine intelligence
\note{Called the \s{vij\~n\=ana} or \s{buddhi}, a word which may lead to some misunderstanding as it is also applied
to the mental intelligence which is only a lower derivation from the divine gnosis.} or gnosis and to the triple
spiritual principle of Sachchidananda. From them the lower worlds derive by a sort of fall of the Purusha into
certain specific or narrow conditions of the play of the soul with its nature. But these also are divided from us by
no unbridgeable gulf; they affect us through what are called the knowledge-sheath and the bliss-sheath, through
the causal or spiritual body, and less directly through the mental body, nor are their secret powers absent from
the workings of the vital and material existence. Our conscious spiritual being and our intuitive mind awaken in us
as a result of the pressure of these highest worlds on the mental being in life and body. But this causal body is, as
we may say, little developed in the majority of men and to live in it or to ascend to the supramental planes, as
distinguished from corresponding sub-planes in the mental being, or still more to dwell consciously upon them is
the most difficult thing of all for the human being. It can be done in the trance of Samadhi, but otherwise only by
a new evolution of the capacities of the individual Purusha of which few are even willing to conceive. Yet is that
the condition of the perfect self-consciousness by which alone the Purusha can possess the full conscious control
of Prakriti; for there not even the mind determines, but the Spirit freely uses the lower differentiating principles
as minor terms of its existence governed by the higher and reaching by them their own perfect capacity. That
alone would be the perfect evolution of the involved and development of the undeveloped for which the Purusha
has sought in the material universe, as if in a wager with itself, the conditions of the greatest difficulty.
Page 456

\par
\hn Chapter XX
\par
\ht The Lower Triple Purusha
\par\drop Such is the constituent principle of the various worlds of cosmic existence and the various planes of our
being; they are as if a ladder plunging down into Matter and perhaps below it, rising up into the heights of the
Spirit, even perhaps to the point at which existence escapes out of cosmic being into ranges of a supra-cosmic
Absolute,—so at least it is averred in the world-system of the Buddhists. But to our ordinary materialised
consciousness all this does not exist because it is hidden from us by our preoccupation with our existence in a
little corner of the material universe and with the petty experiences of the little hour of time which is represented
by our life in a single body upon this earth. To that consciousness the world is a mass of material things and
forces thrown into some kind of shape and harmonised into a system of regulated movements by a number of
fixed self-existent laws which we have to obey, by which we are governed and circumscribed and of which we
have to get the best knowledge we can so as to make the most of this one brief existence which begins with
birth, ends with death and has no second recurrence. Our own being is a sort of accident or at least a very small
and minor circumstance in the universal life of Matter or the eternal continuity of the workings of material Force.
Somehow or other a soul or mind has come to exist in a body and it stumbles about among things and forces
which it does not very well understand, at first preoccupied with the difficulty of managing to live in a dangerous
and largely hostile world and then with the effort to understand its laws and use them so as to make life as
tolerable or as happy as possible so long as it lasts. If we were really nothing more than such a minor movement
of individualised mind in Matter, existence would have nothing more to offer us; its best part would be at most
this struggle of an ephemeral intellect and will with eternal
Page 457

Matter and with the difficulties of Life supplemented and eased by a play of imagination and by the consoling
fictions presented to us by religion and art and all the wonders dreamed of by the brooding mind and restless
fancy of man.
\par But because he is a soul and not merely a living body, man can never for long remain satisfied that this first
view of his existence, the sole view justified by the external and objective facts of life, is the real truth or the
whole knowledge: his subjective being is full of hints and inklings of realities beyond, it is open to the sense of
infinity and immortality, it is easily convinced of other worlds, higher possibilities of being, larger fields of
experience for the soul. Science gives us the objective truth of existence and the superficial knowledge of our
physical and vital being; but we feel that there are truths beyond which possibly through the cultivation of our
subjective being and the enlargement of its powers may come to lie more and more open to us. When the
knowledge of this world is ours, we are irresistibly impelled to seek for the knowledge of other states of
existence beyond, and that is the reason why an age of strong materialism and scepticism is always followed by
an age of occultism, of mystical creeds, of new religions and profounder seekings after the Infinite and the
Divine. The knowledge of our superficial mentality and the laws of our bodily life is not enough; it brings us
always to all that mysterious and hidden depth of subjective existence below and behind of which our surface
consciousness is only a fringe or an outer court. We come to see that what is present to our physical senses is
only the material shell of cosmic existence and what is obvious in our superficial mentality is only the margin of
immense continents which lie behind unexplored. To explore them must be the work of another knowledge than
that of physical science or of a superficial psychology.
\par Religion is the first attempt of man to get beyond himself and beyond the obvious and material facts of his
existence. Its first essential work is to confirm and make real to him his subjective sense of an Infinite on which
his material and mental being depends and the aspiration of his soul to come into its presence and live in contact
with it. Its function is to assure
Page 458

him too of that possibility of which he has always dreamed, but of which his ordinary life gives him no assurance,
the possibility of transcending himself and growing out of bodily life and mortality into the joy of immortal life and
spiritual existence. It also confirms in him the sense that there are worlds or planes of existence other than that in
which his lot is now cast, worlds in which this mortality and this subjection to evil and suffering are not the
natural state, but rather bliss of immortality is the eternal condition. Incidentally, it gives him a rule of mortal life
by which he shall prepare himself for immortality. He is a soul and not a body and his earthly life is a means by
which he determines the future conditions of his spiritual being. So much is common to all religions; beyond this
we get from them no assured certainty. Their voices vary; some tell us that one life on earth is all we have in
which to determine our future existence, deny the past immortality of the soul and assert only its future
immortality, threaten it even with the incredible dogma of a future of eternal suffering for those who miss the
right path, while others more large and rational affirm successive existences by which the soul grows into the
knowledge of the Infinite with a complete assurance for all of ultimate arrival and perfection. Some present the
Infinite to us as a Being other than ourselves with whom we can have personal relations, others as an impersonal
existence into which our separate being has to merge; some therefore give us as our goal worlds beyond in
which we dwell in the presence of the Divine, others a cessation of world-existence by immergence in the
Infinite. Most invite us to bear or to abandon earthly life as a trial or a temporary affliction or a vanity and fix our
hopes beyond; in some we find a vague hint of a future triumph of the Spirit, the Divine in the body, upon this
earth, in the collective life of man, and so justify not only the separate hope and aspiration of the individual but the
united and sympathetic hope and aspiration of the race. Religion in fact is not knowledge, but a faith and
aspiration; it is justified indeed both by an imprecise intuitive knowledge of large spiritual truths and by the
subjective experience of souls that have risen beyond the ordinary life, but in itself it only gives us the hope and
faith by which we may be
Page 459

induced to aspire to the intimate possession of the hidden tracts and larger realities of the Spirit. That we turn
always the few distinct truths and the symbols or the particular discipline of a religion into hard and fast dogmas,
is a sign that as yet we are only infants in the spiritual knowledge and are yet far from the science of the Infinite.
\par Yet behind every great religion, behind, that is to say, its exoteric side of faith, hope, symbols, scattered
truths and limiting dogmas, there is an esoteric side of inner spiritual training and illumination by which the hidden
truths may be known, worked out, possessed. Behind every exoteric religion there is an esoteric Yoga, an
intuitive knowledge to which its faith is the first step, inexpressible realities of which its symbols are the figured
expression, a deeper sense for its scattered truths, mysteries of the higher planes of existence of which even its
dogmas and superstitions are crude hints and indications. What Science does for our knowledge of the material
world, replacing first appearances and uses by the hidden truths and as yet occult powers of its great natural
forces and in our own minds beliefs and opinions by verified experience and a profounder understanding, Yoga
does for the higher planes and worlds and possibilities of our being which are aimed at by the religions. Therefore
all this mass of graded experience existing behind closed doors to which the consciousness of man may find, if it
wills, the key, falls within the province of a comprehensive Yoga of knowledge, which need not be confined to
the seeking after the Absolute alone or the knowledge of the Divine in itself or of the Divine only in its isolated
relations with the individual human soul. It is true that the consciousness of the Absolute is the highest reach of
the Yoga of knowledge and that the possession of the Divine is its first, greatest and most ardent object and that
to neglect it for an inferior knowledge is to afflict our Yoga with inferiority or even frivolity and to miss or fall
away from its characteristic object; but, the Divine in itself being known, the Yoga of knowledge may well
embrace also the knowledge of the Divine in its relations with ourselves and the world on the different planes of
our existence. To rise to the pure Self being
Page 460

steadfastly held to as the summit of our subjective self-uplifting, we may from that height possess our lower
selves even to the physical and the workings of Nature which belong to them.
\par We may seek this knowledge on two sides separately, the side of Purusha, the side of Prakriti; and we may
combine the two for the perfect possession of the various relations of Purusha and Prakriti in the light of the
Divine. There is, says the Upanishad, a fivefold soul in man and the world, the microcosm and the macrocosm.
The physical soul, self or being,—Purusha, Atman,—is that of which we are all at first conscious, a self which
seems to have hardly any existence apart from the body and no action vital or even mental independent of it.
This physical soul is present everywhere in material Nature; it pervades the body, actuates obscurely its
movements and is the whole basis of its experiences; it informs all things even that are not mentally conscious.
But in man this physical being has become vitalised and mentalised; it has received something of the law and
capacities of the vital and mental being and nature. But its possession of them is derivative, superimposed, as it
were, on its original nature and exercised under subjection to the law and action of the physical existence and its
instruments. It is this dominance of our mental and vital parts by the body and the physical nature which seems at
first sight to justify the theory of the materialists that mind and life are only circumstances and results of physical
force and all their operations explicable by the activities of that force in the animal body. In fact entire subjection
of the mind and the life to the body is the characteristic of an undeveloped humanity, as it is in an even greater
degree of the infra-human animal. According to the theory of reincarnation those who do not get beyond this
stage in the earthly life, cannot rise after death to the mental or higher vital worlds, but have to return from the
confines of a series of physical planes to increase their development in the next earthly existence. For the
undeveloped physical soul is entirely dominated by material nature and its impressions and has to work them out
to a better advantage before it can rise in the scale of being.
\par A more developed humanity allows us to make a better and
Page 461

freer use of all the capacities and experiences that we derive from the vital and mental planes of being, to lean
more for support upon these hidden planes, be less absorbed by the physical and to govern and modify the
original nature of the physical being by greater vital forces and powers from the desire-world and greater and
subtler mental forces and powers from the psychical and intellectual planes. By this development we are able to
rise to higher altitudes of the intermediary existence between death and rebirth and to make a better and more
rapid use of rebirth itself for a yet higher mental and spiritual development. But even so, in the physical being
which still determines the greater part of our waking self, we act without definite consciousness of the worlds or
planes which are the sources of our action. We are aware indeed of the life-plane and mind-plane of the physical
being, but not of the life-plane and mind-plane proper or of the superior and larger vital and mental being which
we are behind the veil of our ordinary consciousness. It is only at a high stage of development that we become
aware of them and even then, ordinarily, only at the back of the action of our mentalised physical nature; we do
not actually live on those planes, for if we did we could very soon arrive at the conscious control of the body by
the life-power and of both by the sovereign mind; we should then be able to determine our physical and mental
life to a very large extent by our will and knowledge as masters of our being and with a direct action of the mind
on the life and body. By Yoga this power of transcending the physical self and taking possession of the higher
selves may to a greater or less degree be acquired through a heightened and widened self-consciousness and
self-mastery.
\par This may be done, on the side of Purusha, by drawing back from the physical self and its preoccupation with
physical nature and through concentration of thought and will raising oneself into the vital and then into the
mental self. By doing so we can become the vital being and draw up the physical self into that new
consciousness so that we are only aware of the body, its nature and its actions as secondary circumstances of
the Life-soul which we now are, used by it for its relations with the
Page 462

material world. A certain remoteness from physical being and then a superiority to it; a vivid sense of the body
being a mere instrument or shell and easily detachable; an extraordinary effectivity of our desires on our physical
being and life-environment; a great sense of power and ease in manipulating and directing the vital energy of
which we now become vividly conscious, for its action is felt by us concretely, subtly physical in relation to the
body, sensible in a sort of subtle density as an energy used by the mind; an awareness of the life-plane in us
above the physical and knowledge and contact with the beings of the desire-world; a coming into action of new
powers,—what are usually called occult powers or siddhis; a close sense of and sympathy with the Life-soul in
the world and a knowledge or sensation of the emotions, desires, vital impulses of others; these are some of the
signs of this new consciousness gained by Yoga.
\par But all this belongs to the inferior grades of spiritual experience and indeed is hardly more spiritual than the
physical existence. We have in the same way to go yet higher and raise ourselves into the mental self. By doing
so we can become the mental self and draw up the physical and vital being into it, so that life and body and their
operations become to us minor circumstances of our being used by the Mind-soul which we now are for the
execution of its lower purposes that belong to the material existence. Here too we acquire at first a certain
remoteness from the life and the body and our real life seems to be on quite another plane than material man's, in
contact with a subtler existence, a greater light of knowledge than the terrestrial, a far rarer and yet more
sovereign energy; we are in touch in fact with the mental plane, aware of the mental worlds, can be in
communication with its beings and powers. From that plane we behold the desire-world and the material
existence as if below us, things that we can cast away from us if we will and in fact easily reject when we
relinquish the body, so as to dwell in the mental or psychical heavens. But we can also, instead of being thus
remote and detached, become rather superior to the life and body and the vital and material planes and act upon
them with mastery from our new height of being. Another sort
Page 463

of dynamis than physical or vital energy, something that we may call pure mind-power and soul-force, which the
developed human being uses indeed but derivatively and imperfectly, but which we can now use freely and with
knowledge, becomes the ordinary process of our action, while desire-force and physical action fall into a
secondary place and are only used with this new energy behind them and as its occasional channels. We are in
touch and sympathy also with the Mind in cosmos, conscious of it, aware of the intentions, directions,
thought-forces, struggle of subtle powers behind all happenings, which the ordinary man is ignorant of or can only
obscurely infer from the physical happening, but which we can now see and feel directly before there is any
physical sign or even vital intimation of their working. We acquire too the knowledge and sense of the
mind-action of other beings whether on the physical plane or on those above it; and the higher capacities of the
mental being,—occult powers or siddhis, but of a much rarer or subtler kind than those proper to the vital
plane,—naturally awake in our consciousness.
\par All these however are circumstances of the lower triple world of our being, the \s{trailokya} of the ancient
sages. Living on these we are, whatever the enlargement of our powers and our consciousness, still living within
the limits of the cosmic gods and subject, though with a much subtler, easier and modified subjection, to the reign
of Prakriti over Purusha. To achieve real freedom and mastery we have to ascend to a yet higher level of the
many-plateaued mountain of our being.
Page 464

\par
\hn Chapter XXI
\par
\ht The Ladder of Self-Transcendence
\par\drop The transcendence of this lower triple being and this lower triple world, to which ordinarily our
consciousness and its powers and results are limited,—a transcendence described by the Vedic seers as an
exceeding or breaking beyond the two firmaments of heaven and earth,—opens out a hierarchy of infinitudes to
which the normal existence of man even in its highest and widest flights is still a stranger. Into that altitude, even
to the lowest step of its hierarchy, it is difficult for him to rise. A separation, acute in practice though unreal in
essence, divides the total being of man, the microcosm, as it divides also the world-being, the macrocosm. Both
have a higher and a lower hemisphere, the \s{par\=ardha} and \s{apar\=ardha} of the ancient wisdom. The higher
hemisphere is the perfect and eternal reign of the Spirit; for there it manifests without cessation or diminution its
infinities, deploys the unconcealed glories of its illimitable existence, its illimitable consciousness and knowledge,
its illimitable force and power, its illimitable beatitude. The lower hemisphere belongs equally to the Spirit; but
here it is veiled, closely, thickly, by its inferior self-expression of limiting mind, confined life and dividing body.
The Self in the lower hemisphere is shrouded in name and form; its consciousness is broken up by the division
between the internal and external, the individual and universal; its vision and sense are turned outward; its force,
limited by division of its consciousness, works in fetters; its knowledge, will, power, delight, divided by this
division, limited by this limitation, are open to the experience of their contrary or perverse forms, to ignorance,
weakness and suffering. We can indeed become aware of the true Self or Spirit in ourselves by turning our
sense and vision inward; we can discover too the same Self or Spirit in the external world and its phenomena by
plunging them there also inward through the veil of names
Page 465

and forms to that which dwells in these or else stands behind them. Our normal consciousness through this
inward look may become by reflection aware of the infinite being, consciousness and delight of the Self and
share in its passive or static infinity of these things. But we can only to a very limited extent share in its active or
dynamic manifestation of knowledge, power and joy. Even this static identity by reflection cannot, ordinarily, be
effected without a long and difficult effort and as the result of many lives of progressive self-development; for
very firmly is our normal consciousness bound to the law of its lower hemisphere of being. To understand the
possibility of transcending it at all, we must restate in a practical formula the relations of the worlds which
constitute the two hemispheres.
\par All is determined by the Spirit, for all from subtlest existence to grossest matter is manifestation of the Spirit.
But the Spirit, Self or Being determines the world it lives in and the experiences of its consciousness, force and
delight in that world by some poise—among many possible—of the relations of Purusha and Prakriti, Soul and
Nature,—some basic poise in one or other of its own cosmic principles. Poised in the principle of Matter, it
becomes the physical self of a physical universe in the reign of a physical Nature. Spirit is then absorbed in its
experience of Matter; it is dominated by the ignorance and inertia of the tamasic Power proper to physical
existence. In the individual it becomes a materialised soul, \s{annamaya puru\,sa}, whose life and mind have
developed out of the ignorance and inertia of the material principle and are subject to their fundamental
limitations. For life in Matter works in dependence on the body; mind in Matter works in dependence on the body
and on the vital or nervous being; spirit itself in Matter is limited and divided in its self-relation and its powers by
the limitations and divisions of this matter-governed and life-driven mind. This materialised soul lives bound to the
physical body and its narrow superficial external consciousness, and it takes normally the experiences of its
physical organs, its senses, its matter-bound life and mind, with at most some limited spiritual glimpses, as the
whole truth of existence.
Page 466

\par Man is a spirit, but a spirit that lives as a mental being in physical Nature; he is to his own self-consciousness
a mind in a physical body. But at first he is this mental being materialised and he takes the materialised soul,
\s{annamaya puru\,sa}, for his real self. He is obliged to accept, as the Upanishad expresses it, Matter for the
Brahman because his vision here sees Matter as that from which all is born, by which all lives and to which all
return in their passing. His natural highest concept of Spirit is an Infinite, preferably an inconscient Infinite,
inhabiting or pervading the material universe (which alone it really knows), and manifesting by the power of its
presence all these forms around him. His natural highest conception of himself is a vaguely conceived soul or
spirit, a soul manifested only by the physical life's experiences, bound up with physical phenomena and forced on
its dissolution to return by an automatic necessity to the vast indeterminateness of the Infinite. But because he
has the power of self-development, he can rise beyond these natural conceptions of the materialised soul; he can
supplement them with a certain derivative experience drawn from supraphysical planes and worlds. He can
concentrate in mind and develop the mental part of his being, usually at the expense of the fullness of his vital
and physical life and in the end the mind predominates and can open to the Beyond. He can concentrate this
self-liberating mind on the Spirit. Here too usually in the process he turns away more and more from his full
mental and physical life; he limits or discourages their possibilities as much as his material foundation in nature
will allow him. In the end his spiritual life predominates, destroys his earthward tendency and breaks its ties and
limitations. Spiritualised, he places his real existence beyond in other worlds, in the heavens of the vital or mental
plane; he begins to regard life on earth as a painful or troublesome incident or passage in which he can never
arrive at any full enjoyment of his inner ideal self, his spiritual essence. Moreover, his highest conception of the
Self or Spirit is apt to be more or less quietistic; for, as we have seen, it is its static infinity alone that he can
entirely experience, the still freedom of Purusha unlimited by Prakriti, the Soul standing back from Nature. There
may come
Page 467

indeed some divine dynamic manifestation in him, but it cannot rise entirely above the heavy limitations of
physical Nature. The peace of the silent and passive Self is more easily attainable and he can more easily and
fully hold it; too difficult for him is the bliss of an infinite activity, the dynamis of an immeasurable Power.
\par But the Spirit can be poised in the principle of Life, not in Matter. The Spirit so founded becomes the vital
self of a vital world, the Life-soul of a Life-energy in the reign of a consciously dynamic Nature. Absorbed in the
experiences of the power and play of a conscious Life, it is dominated by the desire, activity and passion of the
rajasic principle proper to vital existence. In the individual this spirit becomes a vital soul, \s{pr\=a\,namaya puru\,sa},
in whose nature the life-energies tyrannise over the mental and physical principles. The physical element in a
vital world readily shapes its activities and formations in response to desire and its imaginations, it serves and
obeys the passion and power of life and their formations and does not thwart or limit them as it does here on
earth where life is a precarious incident in inanimate Matter. The mental element too is moulded and limited by
the life-power, obeys it and helps only to enrich and fulfil the urge of its desires and the energy of its impulses.
This vital soul lives in a vital body composed of a substance much subtler than physical matter; it is a substance
surcharged with conscious energy, capable of much more powerful perceptions, capacities, sense-activities than
any that the gross atomic elements of earth-matter can offer. Man too has in himself behind his physical being,
subliminal to it, unseen and unknown, but very close to it and forming with it the most naturally active part of his
existence, this vital soul, this vital nature and this vital body; a whole vital plane connected with the life-world or
desire-world is hidden in us, a secret consciousness in which life and desire find their untrammelled play and their
easy self-expression and from there throw their influences and formations on our outer life.
\par In proportion as the power of this vital plane manifests itself in man and takes hold of his physical being, this
son of
Page 468

earth becomes a vehicle of the life energy, forceful in his desires, vehement in his passions and emotions,
intensely dynamic in his action, more and more the rajasic man. It is possible now for him to awaken in his
consciousness to the vital plane and to become the vital soul, \s{pr\=a\,namaya puru\,sa}, put on the vital nature and
live in the secret vital as well as the visible physical body. If he achieves this change with some fullness or
one-pointedness—usually it is under great and salutary limitations or attended by saving complexities—and
without rising beyond these things, without climbing to a supra-vital height from which they can be used, purified,
uplifted, he becomes the lower type of Asura or Titan, a Rakshasa in nature, a soul of sheer power and
life-energy, magnified or racked by a force of unlimited desire and passion, hunted and driven by an active
capacity and colossal rajasic ego, but in possession of far greater and more various powers than those of the
physical man in the ordinary more inert earth-nature. Even if he develops mind greatly on the vital plane and uses
its dynamic energy for self-control as well as for self-satisfaction, it will still be with an Asuric energism
(\s{tapasy\=a}) although of a higher type and directed to a more governed satisfaction of the rajasic ego.
\par But for the vital plane also it is possible, even as on the physical, to rise to a certain spiritual greatness in its
own kind. It is open to the vital man to lift himself beyond the conceptions and energies natural to the desire-soul
and the desire-plane. He can develop a higher mentality and, within the conditions of the vital being, concentrate
upon some realisation of the Spirit or Self behind or beyond its forms and powers. In this spiritual realisation there
would be a less strong necessity of quietism; for there would be a greater possibility of an active effectuation of
the bliss and power of the Eternal, mightier and more self-satisfied powers, a richer flowering of the dynamic
Infinite. Nevertheless that effectuality could never come anywhere near to a true and integral perfection; for the
conditions of the desire-world are like those of the physical improper to the development of the complete spiritual
life. The vital being too must develop spirit to the detriment of his fullness, activity and force of life
Page 469

in the lower hemisphere of our existence and turn in the end away from the vital formula, away from life either
to the Silence or to an ineffable Power beyond him. If he does not withdraw from life, he must remain enchained
by life, limited in his self-fulfilment by the downward pull of the desire-world and its dominant rajasic principle.
On the vital plane also, in its own right alone, a perfect perfection is impossible; the soul that attains only so far
would have to return to the physical life for a greater experience, a higher self-development, a more direct ascent
to the Spirit.
\par Above matter and life stands the principle of mind, nearer to the secret Origin of things. The Spirit poised in
mind becomes the mental self of a mental world and dwells there in the reign of its own pure and luminous
mental Nature. There it acts in the intrinsic freedom of the cosmic Intelligence supported by the combined
workings of a psycho-mental and a higher emotional mind-force, subtilised and enlightened by the clarity and
happiness of the sattwic principle proper to the mental existence. In the individual the spirit so poised becomes a
mental soul, \s{manomaya puru\,sa}, in whose nature the clarity and luminous power of the mind acts in its own
right independent of any limitation or oppression by the vital or corporeal instruments; it rather rules and
determines entirely the forms of its body and the powers of its life. For mind in its own plane is not limited by life
and obstructed by matter as it is here in the earth-process. This mental soul lives in a mental or subtle body
which enjoys capacities of knowledge, perception, sympathy and interpenetration with other beings hardly
imaginable by us and a free, delicate and extensive mentalised sense-faculty not limited by the grosser conditions
of the life nature or the physical nature.
\par Man too has in himself, subliminal, unknown and unseen, concealed behind his waking consciousness and
visible organism this mental soul, mental nature, mental body and a mental plane, not materialised, in which the
principle of Mind is at home and not as here at strife with a world which is alien to it, obstructive to its freedom
and corruptive of its purity and clearness. All the higher faculties of man, his intellectual and psycho-mental
Page 470

being and powers, his higher emotional life awaken and increase in proportion as this mental plane in him presses
upon him. For the more it manifests, the more it influences the physical parts, the more it enriches and elevates
the corresponding mental plane of the embodied nature. At a certain pitch of its increasing sovereignty it can
make man truly man and not merely a reasoning animal; for it gives then its characteristic force to that mental
being within us which our humanity is in the inwardly governing but still too hampered essence of its
psychological structure.
\par It is possible for man to awaken to this higher mental consciousness, to become this mental
being,
\note{I include here in mind, not only the highest range of mind ordinarily known to man, but yet higher ranges to
which he has either no current faculty of admission or else only a partial and mixed reception of some faint
portion of their powers,—the illumined mind, the intuition and finally the creative Overmind or Maya which
stands far above and is the source of our present existence. If mind is to be understood only as Reason or human
intelligence, then the free mental being and its state would be something much more limited and very inferior to
the description given here.} put on this mental nature and live not only in the vital and physical sheaths, but in this
mental body. If there were a sufficient completeness in this transformation he would become capable of a life
and a being at least half divine. For he would enjoy powers and a vision and perceptions beyond the scope of this
ordinary life and body; he would govern all by the clarities of pure knowledge; he would be united to other beings
by a sympathy of love and happiness; his emotions would be lifted to the perfection of the psycho-mental plane,
his sensations rescued from grossness, his intellect subtle, pure and flexible, delivered from the deviations of the
impure pranic energy and the obstructions of matter. And he would develop too the reflection of a wisdom and
bliss higher than any mental joy and knowledge; for he could receive more fully and without our incompetent
mind's deforming and falsifying mixture the inspirations and intuitions that are the arrows of the supramental
Light and form his perfected mental existence in the mould and power of that vaster splendour. He could then
realise too the self or Spirit in a much larger and more luminous and
Page 471

more intimate intensity than is now possible and with a greater play of its active power and bliss in the satisfied
harmony of his existence.
\par And to our ordinary notions this may well seem to be a consummate perfection, something to which man
might aspire in his highest flights of idealism. No doubt, it would be a sufficient perfection for the pure mental
being in its own character; but it would still fall far below the greater possibilities of the spiritual nature. For here
too our spiritual realisation would be subject to the limitations of the mind which is in the nature of a reflected,
diluted and diffused or a narrowly intensive light, not the vast and comprehensive self-existent luminosity and joy
of the Spirit. That vaster light, that profounder bliss are beyond the mental reaches. Mind indeed can never be a
perfect instrument of the Spirit; a supreme self-expression is not possible in its movements because to separate,
divide, limit is its very character. Even if mind could be free from all positive falsehood and error, even if it could
be all intuitive and infallibly intuitive, it could still present and organise only half-truths or separate truths and these
too not in their own body but in luminous representative figures put together to make an accumulated total or a
massed structure. Therefore the self-perfecting mental being here must either depart into pure spirit by the
shedding of its lower existence or return upon the physical life to develop in it a capacity not yet found in our
mental and psychic nature. This is what the Upanishad expresses when it says that the heavens attained by the
mind Purusha are those to which man is lifted by the rays of the sun, the diffused, separated, though intense
beams of the supramental truth-consciousness, and from these it has to return to the earthly existence. But the
illuminates who renouncing earth-life go beyond through the gateways of the sun, do not return hither. The
mental being exceeding his sphere does not return because by that transition he enters a high range of existence
peculiar to the superior hemisphere. He cannot bring down its greater spiritual nature into this lower triplicity; for
here the mental being is the highest expression of the Self. Here the triple mental, vital and physical body
provides almost the
Page 472

whole range of our capacity and cannot suffice for that greater consciousness; the vessel has not been built to
contain a greater godhead or to house the splendours of this supramental force and knowledge.
\par This limitation is true only so long as man remains closed within the boundaries of the mental Maya. If he
rises into the knowledge-self beyond the highest mental stature, if he becomes the knowledge-soul, the Spirit
poised in gnosis, \s{vij\~n\=anamaya puru\,sa}, and puts on the nature of its infinite truth and power, if he lives in the
knowledge-sheath, the causal body as well as in these subtle mental, interlinking vital and grosser physical
sheaths or bodies, then, but then only he will be able to draw down entirely into his terrestrial existence the
fullness of the infinite spiritual consciousness; only then will he avail to raise his total being and even his whole
manifested, embodied expressive nature into the spiritual kingdom. But this is difficult in the extreme; for the
causal body opens itself readily to the consciousness and capacities of the spiritual planes and belongs in its
nature to the higher hemisphere of existence, but it is either not developed at all in man or only as yet crudely
developed and organised and veiled behind many intervening portals of the subliminal in us. It draws its stuff
from the plane of the truth-knowledge and the plane of the infinite bliss and these pertain altogether to a still
inaccessible higher hemisphere. Shedding upon this lower existence their truth and light and joy they are the
source of all that we call spirituality and all that we call perfection. But this infiltration comes from behind thick
coverings through which they arrive so tempered and weakened that they are entirely obscured in the materiality
of our physical perceptions, grossly distorted and perverted in our vital impulses, perverted too though a little less
grossly in our ideative seekings, minimised even in the comparative purity and intensity of the highest intuitive
ranges of our mental nature. The supramental principle is secretly lodged in all existence. It is there even in the
grossest materiality, it preserves and governs the lower worlds by its hidden power and law; but that power veils
itself and that law works unseen through the shackled limitations and limping
Page 473

deformations of the lesser rule of our physical, vital, mental \NH Nature. Yet its governing presence in the
lowest forms assures us, because of the unity of all existence, that there is a possibility of their awakening, a
possibility even of their perfect manifestation here in spite of every veil, in spite of all the mass of our apparent
disabilities, in spite of the incapacity or unwillingness of our mind and life and body. And what is possible, must
one day be, for that is the law of the omnipotent Spirit.
\par The character of these higher states of the soul and their greater worlds of spiritual Nature is necessarily
difficult to seize. Even the Upanishads and the Veda only shadow them out by figures, hints and symbols. Yet it
is necessary to attempt some account of their principles and practical effect so far as they can be grasped by the
mind that stands on the border of the two hemispheres. The passage beyond that border would be the
culmination, the completeness of the Yoga of self-transcendence by self-knowledge. The soul that aspires to
perfection, draws back and upward, says the Upanishad, from the physical into the vital and from the vital into
the mental Purusha, from the mental into the knowledge-soul and from that self of knowledge into the bliss
Purusha. This self of bliss is the conscious foundation of perfect Sachchidananda and to pass into it completes
the soul's ascension. The mind therefore must try to give to itself some account of this decisive transformation of
the embodied consciousness, this radiant transfiguration and self-exceeding of our ever aspiring nature. The
description mind can arrive at, can never be adequate to the thing itself, but it may point at least to some
indicative shadow of it or perhaps some half-luminous image.
Page 474

\par
\hn Chapter XXII
\par
\ht Vijnana or Gnosis
\par\drop In our perfect self-transcendence we pass out and up from the ignorance or half-enlightenment of our
mental conscious-being into a greater wisdom-self and truth-power above it, there to dwell in the unwalled light
of a divine knowledge. The mental man that we are is changed into the gnostic soul, the truth-conscious godhead,
the \s{vij\~n\=anamaya} Purusha. Seated on that level of the hill of our ascension we are in a quite different plane
from this material, this vital, this mental poise of the universal spirit, and with this change changes too all our view
and experience of our soul-life and of the world around us. We are born into a new soul-status and put on a new
nature; for according to the status of the soul is the status of the Prakriti. At each transition of the world-ascent,
from matter to life, from life to mind, from mind bound to free intelligence, as the latent, half-manifested or
already manifest soul rises to a higher and higher level of being, the nature also is elevated into a superior
working, a wider consciousness, a vaster force and an intenser or larger range and joy of existence. But the
transition from the mind-self to the knowledge-self is the great and the decisive transition in the Yoga. It is the
shaking off of the last hold on us of the cosmic ignorance and our firm foundation in the Truth of things, in a
consciousness infinite and eternal and inviolable by obscurity, falsehood, suffering or error.
\par This is the first summit which enters into the divine perfection, \s{s\=adharmya}, \s{s\=ad\,r\'sya}; for all the rest
only look up to it or catch some rays of its significance. The highest heights of mind or of overmind come still
within the belt of a mitigated ignorance; they can refract a divine Light but not pass it on in undiminished power
to our lower members. For so long as we are within the triple stratum of mind, life and body, our active nature
continues to work in the force of the ignorance even when the soul in Mind
Page 475

possesses something of the knowledge. And even if the soul were to reflect or to represent all the largeness of
the knowledge in its mental consciousness, it would be unable to mobilise it rightly in force of action. The truth in
its action might greatly increase, but it would still be pursued by a limitation, still condemned to a divisibility which
would prevent it from working integrally in the power of the infinite. The power of a divinely illumined mind may
be immense compared with ordinary powers, but it will still be subject to incapacity and there can be no perfect
correspondence between the force of the effective will and the light of the idea which inspires it. The infinite
Presence may be there in status, but the dynamis of the operations of nature still belongs to the lower Prakriti,
must follow its triple modes of working and cannot give any adequate form to the greatness within it. This is the
tragedy of ineffectivity, of the hiatus between ideal and effective will, of our constant incapacity to work out in
living form and action the truth we feel in our inner consciousness that pursues all the aspiration of mind and life
towards the divinity behind them. But the \s{vij\~n\=ana} or gnosis is not only truth but truth power, it is the very
working of the infinite and divine nature; it is the divine knowledge one with the divine will in the force and
delight of a spontaneous and luminous and inevitable self-fulfilment. By the gnosis, then, we change our human
into a divine nature.
\par What then is this gnosis and how can we describe it? Two opposite errors have to be avoided, two
misconceptions that disfigure opposite sides of the truth of gnosis. One error of intellect-bounded thinkers takes
\s{vij\~n\=ana} as synonymous with the other Indian term \s{buddhi} and \sforced{buddhi} as synonymous with the
reason, the discerning intellect, the logical intelligence. The systems that accept this significance, pass at once
from a plane of pure intellect to a plane of pure spirit. No intermediate power is recognised, no diviner action of
knowledge than the pure reason is admitted; the limited human means for fixing truth is taken for the highest
possible dynamics of consciousness, its topmost force and original movement. An opposite error, a misconception
of the mystics identifies \s{vij\~n\=ana} with the consciousness of
Page 476

the Infinite free from all ideation or else ideation packed into one essence of thought, lost to other dynamic action
in the single and invariable idea of the One. This is the \s{caitanyaghana} of the Upanishad and is one movement
or rather one thread of the many-aspected movement of the gnosis. The gnosis, the Vijnana, is not only this
concentrated consciousness of the infinite Essence; it is also and at the same time an infinite knowledge of the
myriad play of the Infinite. It contains all ideation (not mental but supramental), but it is not limited by ideation, for
it far exceeds all ideative movement. Nor is the gnostic ideation in its character an intellectual thinking; it is not
what we call the reason, not a concentrated intelligence. For the reason is mental in its methods, mental in its
acquisitions, mental in its basis, but the ideative method of the gnosis is self-luminous, supramental, its yield of
thought-light spontaneous, not proceeding by acquisition, its thought-basis a rendering of conscious identities, not
a translation of the impressions born of indirect contacts. There is a relation and even a sort of broken identity
between the two forms of thought; for one proceeds covertly from the other, mind is born from that which is
beyond mind. But they act on different planes and reverse each other's process.
\par Even the purest reason, the most luminous rational intellectuality is not the gnosis. Reason or intellect is only
the lower \s{buddhi}; it is dependent for its action on the percepts of the sense-mind and on the concepts of the
mental intelligence. It is not like the gnosis, self-luminous, authentic, making the subject one with the object.
There is, indeed, a higher form of the \sforced{buddhi} that can be called the intuitive mind or intuitive reason,
and this by its intuitions, its inspirations, its swift revelatory vision, its luminous insight and discrimination can do
the work of the reason with a higher power, a swifter action, a greater and spontaneous certitude. It acts in a
self-light of the truth which does not depend upon the torch-flares of the sense-mind and its limited uncertain
percepts; it proceeds not by intelligent but by visional concepts: it is a kind of truth-vision, truth-hearing,
truth-memory, direct truth-discernment. This true and authentic intuition must be distinguished from a power of
the ordinary
Page 477

mental reason which is too easily confused with it, the power of involved reasoning that reaches its conclusion by
a bound and does not need the ordinary steps of the logical mind. The logical reason proceeds pace after pace
and tries the sureness of each step like a man who is walking over unsafe ground and has to test by the
hesitating touch of his foot each span of soil that he perceives with his eye. But this other supralogical process of
the reason is a motion of rapid insight or swift discernment; it proceeds by a stride or leap, like a man who
springs from one sure spot to another point of sure footing,—or at least held by him to be sure. He sees the
space he covers in one compact and flashing view, but he does not distinguish or measure either by eye or touch
its successions, features and circumstances. This movement has something of the sense of power of the intuition,
something of its velocity, some appearance of its light and certainty, and we always are apt to take it for the
intuition. But our assumption is an error and, if we trust to it, may lead us into grievous blunders.
\par It is even thought by the intellectualists that the intuition itself is nothing more than this rapid process in
which the whole action of the logical mind is swiftly done or perhaps half-consciously or subconsciously done, not
deliberately worked out in its reasoned method. In its nature, however, this proceeding is quite different from the
intuition and it is not necessarily a truth-movement. The power of its leap may end in a stumble, its swiftness may
betray, its certainty is too often a confident error. The validity of its conclusions must always depend on a
subsequent verification or support from the evidence of the sense-perceptions or a rational linking of intelligent
conceptions must intervene to explain to it its own certitudes. This lower light may indeed receive very readily a
mixture of actual intuition into it and then a pseudo-intuitive or half-intuitive mind is created, very misleading by its
frequent luminous successes palliating a whirl of intensely self-assured false certitudes. The true intuition on the
contrary carries in itself its own guarantee of truth; it is sure and infallible within its limits. And so long as it is
pure intuition and does not admit into itself any mixture of sense-error or
Page 478

intellectual ideation, it is never contradicted by experience: the intuition may be verified by the reason or the
sense-perception afterwards, but its truth does not depend on that verification, it is assured by an automatic
self-evidence. If the reason depending on its inferences contradicts the greater light, it will be found in the end on
ampler knowledge that the intuitional conclusion was correct and that the more plausible rational and inferential
conclusion was an error. For the true intuition proceeds from the self-existent truth of things and is secured by
that self-existent truth and not by any indirect, derivatory or dependent method of arriving at knowledge.
\par But even the intuitive reason is not the gnosis; it is only an edge of light of the supermind finding its way by
flashes of illumination into the mentality like lightnings in dim and cloudy places. Its inspirations, revelations,
intuitions, self-luminous discernings are messages from a higher knowledge-plane that make their way
opportunely into our lower level of consciousness. The very character of the intuitive mind sets a gulf of great
difference between its action and the action of the self-contained gnosis. In the first place it acts by separate and
limited illuminations and its truth is restricted to the often narrow reach or the one brief spot of knowledge lit up
by that one lightning-flash with which its intervention begins and terminates. We see the action of the instinct in
animals,—an automatic intuition in that vital or sense-mind which is the highest and surest instrument that the
animal has to rely on, since it does not possess the human light of the reason, only a cruder and yet ill-formed
intelligence. And we can observe at once that the marvellous truth of this instinct which seems so much surer
than the reason, is limited in the bird, beast or insect to some particular and restricted utility it is admitted to
serve. When the vital mind of the animal tries to act beyond that restricted limit, it blunders in a much blinder way
than the reason of man and has to learn with difficulty by a succession of sense-experiences. The higher mental
intuition of the human being is an inner visional, not a sense intuition; for it illumines the intelligence and not the
sense-mind, it is self-conscious and luminous, not a half-subconscious blind light: it
Page 479

is freely self-acting, not mechanically automatic. But still, even when it is not marred by the imitative
pseudo-intuition, it is restricted in man like the instinct in the animal, restricted to a particular purpose of will or
knowledge as is the instinct to a particular life utility or Nature purpose. And when the intelligence, as is its
almost invariable habit, tries to make use of it, to apply it, to add to it, it builds round the intuitive nucleus in its
own characteristic fashion a mass of mixed truth and error. More often than not, by foisting an element of
sense-error and conceptual error into the very substance of the intuition or by coating it up in mental additions
and deviations, it not merely deflects but deforms its truth and converts it into a falsehood. At the best therefore
the intuition gives us only a limited, though an intense light; at the worst, through our misuse of it or false
imitations of it, it may lead us into perplexities and confusions which the less ambitious intellectual reason avoids
by remaining satisfied with its own safe and plodding method,—safe for the inferior purposes of the reason,
though never a satisfying guide to the inner truth of things.
\par It is possible to cultivate and extend the use of the intuitive mind in proportion as we rely less predominantly
upon the reasoning intelligence. We may train our mentality not to seize, as it does now, upon every separate
flash of intuitive illumination for its own inferior purposes, not to precipitate our thought at once into a crystallising
intellectual action around it; we can train it to think in a stream of successive and connected intuitions, to pour
light upon light in a brilliant and triumphant series. We shall succeed in this difficult change in proportion as we
purify the interfering intelligence,—if we can reduce in it the element of material thought enslaved to the external
appearances of things, the element of vital thought enslaved to the wishes, desires, impulses of the lower nature,
the element of intellectual thought enslaved to our preferred, already settled or congenial ideas, conceptions,
opinions, fixed operations of intelligence, if, having reduced to a minimum those elements, we can replace them
by an intuitive vision and sense of things, an intuitive insight into appearances, an intuitive will, an intuitive
ideation. This is hard
Page 480

enough for our consciousness naturally bound by the triple tie of mentality, vitality, corporeality to its own
imperfection and ignorance, the upper, middle and lower cord in the Vedic parable of the soul's bondage, cords of
the mixed truth and falsehood of appearances by which Shunahshepa was bound to the post of sacrifice.
\par But even if this difficult thing were perfectly accomplished, still the intuition would not be the gnosis; it would
only be its thin prolongation into mind or its sharp edge of first entrance. The difference, not easy to define
except by symbols, may be expressed if we take the Vedic image in which the Sun represents the gnosis and the
sky, mid-air and earth the mentality, vitality, physicality of man and of the universe. Living on the earth, climbing
into the mid-air or even winging in the sky, the mental being, the \s{manomaya} Purusha, would still live in the
rays of the sun and not in its bodily light. And in those rays he would see things not as they are, but as reflected
in his organ of vision, deformed by its faults or limited in their truth by its restrictions. But the \s{vij\~n\=anamaya}
Purusha lives in the Sun itself, in the very body and blaze of the true light;
\note{So the Sun is called in the Veda, \s{\,rta\.m jyoti\,h}.} he knows this light to be his own self-luminous being and
he sees besides all that dwells in the rays of the sun, sees the whole truth of the lower triplicity and each thing
that is in it. He sees it not by reflection in a mental organ of vision, but with the Sun of gnosis itself as his
eye,—for the Sun, says the Veda, is the eye of the gods. The mental being, even in the intuitive mind, can
perceive the truth only by a brilliant reflection or limited communication and subject to the restrictions and the
inferior capacity of the mental vision; but the supramental being sees it by the gnosis itself, from the very centre
and outwelling fount of the truth, in its very form and by its own spontaneous and self-illumining process. For the
Vijnana is a direct and divine as opposed to an indirect and human knowledge.
\par The nature of the gnosis can only be indicated to the intellect by contrasting it with the nature of the intellect,
and even then
Page 481

the phrases we must use cannot illuminate unless aided by some amount of actual experience. For what language
forged by the reason can express the suprarational? Fundamentally, this is the difference between these two
powers that the mental reason proceeds with labour from ignorance to truth, but the gnosis has in itself the direct
contact, the immediate vision, the easy and constant possession of the truth and has no need of seeking or any
kind of procedure. The reason starts with appearances and labours, never or seldom losing at least a partial
dependence on appearances, to arrive at the truth behind them; it shows the truth in the light of the appearances.
The gnosis starts from the truth and shows the appearances in the light of the truth; it is itself the body of the
truth and its spirit. The reason proceeds by inference, it concludes; but the gnosis proceeds by identity or
vision,—it is, sees and knows. As directly as the physical vision sees and grasps the appearance of objects, so
and far more directly the gnosis sees and grasps the truth of things. But where the physical sense gets into
relation with objects by a veiled contact, the gnosis gets into identity with things by an unveiled oneness. Thus it is
able to know all things as a man knows his own existence, simply, convincingly, directly. To the reason only what
the senses give is direct knowledge, \s{pratyak\,sa}, the rest of truth is arrived at indirectly; to the gnosis all its
truth is direct knowledge, \s{pratyak\,sa}. Therefore the truth gained by the intellect is an acquisition over which
there hangs always a certain shadow of doubt, an incompleteness, a surrounding penumbra of night and
ignorance or half-knowledge, a possibility of alteration or annullation by farther knowledge. The truth of the
gnosis is free from doubt, self-evident, self-existent, irrefragable, absolute.
\par The reason has as its first instrument observation general, analytical and synthetic; it aids itself by
comparison, contrast and analogy,—proceeds from experience to indirect knowledge by logical processes of
deduction, induction, all kinds of inference,—rests upon memory, reaches out beyond itself by imagination,
secures itself by judgment: all is a process of groping and seeking. The gnosis does not seek, it possesses. Or if it
has to enlighten, it does not even then seek; it reveals, it illumines. In
Page 482

a consciousness transmuted from intelligence to gnosis, imagination would be replaced by truth-inspiration, mental
judgment would give place to a self-luminous discerning. The slow and stumbling logical process from reasoning
to conclusion would be pushed out by a swift intuitive proceeding; the conclusion or fact would be seen at once in
its own right, by its own self-sufficient witness, and all the evidence by which we arrive at it would be seen too at
once, along with it, in the same comprehensive figure, not as its evidence, but as its intimate conditions,
connections and relations, its constituent parts or its wings of circumstance. Mental and sense observation would
be changed into an inner vision using the instruments as channels, but not dependent on them as the mind in us is
blind and deaf without the physical senses, and this vision would see not merely the thing, but all its truth, its
forces, powers, the eternities within it. Our uncertain memory would fall away and there would come in its place
a luminous possession of knowledge, the divine memory that is not a store of acquisition, but holds all things
always contained in the consciousness, a memory at once of past, present and future.
\par For while the reason proceeds from moment to moment of time and loses and acquires and again loses and
again acquires, the gnosis dominates time in a one view and perpetual power and links past, present and future in
their indivisible connections, in a single continuous map of knowledge, side by side. The gnosis starts from the
totality which it immediately possesses; it sees parts, groups and details only in relation to the totality and in one
vision with it: the mental reason cannot really see the totality at all and does not know fully any whole except by
starting from an analysis and synthesis of its parts, masses and details; otherwise its whole-view is always a
vague apprehension or an imperfect comprehension or a confused summary of indistinct features. The reason
deals with constituents and processes and properties; it tries in vain to form by them an idea of the thing in itself,
its reality, its essence. But the gnosis sees the thing in itself first, penetrates to its original and eternal nature,
adjoins its processes and properties only as a self-expression of its nature. The reason dwells in the diversity and
is its prisoner: it deals
Page 483

with things separately and treats each as a separate existence, as it deals with sections of Time and divisions of
Space; it sees unity only in a sum or by elimination of diversity or as a general conception and a vacant figure.
But the gnosis dwells in the unity and knows by it all the nature of the diversities; it starts from the unity and sees
diversities only of a unity, not diversities constituting the one, but a unity constituting its own multitudes. The
gnostic knowledge, the gnostic sense does not recognise any real division; it does not treat things separately as if
they were independent of their true and original oneness. The reason deals with the finite and is helpless before
the infinite: it can conceive of it as an indefinite extension in which the finite acts, but the infinite in itself it can
with difficulty conceive and cannot at all grasp or penetrate. But the gnosis is, sees and lives in the infinite; it
starts always from the infinite and knows finite things only in their relation to the infinite and in the sense of the
infinite.
\par If we would describe the gnosis as it is in its own awareness, not thus imperfectly as it is to us in contrast
with our own reason and intelligence, it is hardly possible to speak of it except in figures and symbols. And first
we must remember that the gnostic level, Mahat, Vijnana, is not the supreme plane of our consciousness, but a
middle or link plane. Interposed between the triune glory of the utter Spirit, the infinite existence, consciousness
and bliss of the Eternal and our lower triple being and nature, it is as if it stood there as the mediating, formulated,
organising and creative wisdom, power and joy of the Eternal. In the gnosis Sachchidananda gathers up the light
of his unseizable existence and pours it out on the soul in the shape and power of a divine knowledge, a divine
will and a divine bliss of existence. It is as if infinite light were gathered up into the compact orb of the sun and
lavished on all that depends upon the sun in radiances that continue for ever. But the gnosis is not only light, it is
force; it is creative knowledge, it is the self-effective truth of the divine Idea. This idea is not creative
imagination, not something that constructs in a void, but light and power of eternal substance, truth-light full of
truth-force; and it brings out what is latent in being, it does not create a fiction that never
Page 484

was in being. The ideation of the gnosis is radiating light-stuff of the consciousness of the eternal Existence; each
ray is a truth. The will in the gnosis is a conscious force of eternal knowledge; it throws the consciousness and
substance of being into infallible forms of truth-power, forms that embody the idea and make it faultlessly
effective, and it works out each truth-power and each truth-form spontaneously and rightly according to its
nature. Because it carries this creative force of the divine Idea, the Sun, the lord and symbol of the gnosis, is
described in the Veda as the Light which is the father of all things, Surya Savitri, the Wisdom-Luminous who is
the bringer-out into manifest existence. This creation is inspired by the divine delight, the eternal Ananda; it is full
of the joy of its own truth and power, it creates in bliss, creates out of bliss, creates that which is blissful.
Therefore the world of the gnosis, the supramental world is the true and the happy creation, \s{\,rtam},
\s{bhadram}, since all in it shares in the perfect joy that made it. A divine radiance of undeviating knowledge, a
divine power of unfaltering will and a divine ease of unstumbling bliss are the nature or Prakriti of the soul in
supermind, in \s{vij\~n\=ana}.
\par The stuff of the gnostic or supramental plane is made of the perfect absolutes of all that is here imperfect
and relative and its movement of the reconciled interlockings and happy fusions of all that here are opposites. For
behind the appearance of these opposites are their truths and the truths of the Eternal are not in conflict with
each other; our mind's and life's opposites transformed in the supermind into their own true spirit link together
and are seen as tones and colourings of an eternal Reality and everlasting Ananda. Supermind or Gnosis is the
supreme Truth, the supreme Thought, the supreme Word, the supreme Sight, the supreme Will-Idea; it is the
inner and outer extension of the Infinite who is beyond Space, the unfettered Time of the Eternal who is timeless,
the supernal harmony of all absolutes of the Absolute.
\par To the envisaging mind there are three powers of the Vijnana. Its supreme power knows and receives into it
from above all the infinite existence, consciousness and bliss of the Ishwara;
Page 485

it is in its highest height the absolute knowledge and force of eternal Sachchidananda. Its second power
concentrates the Infinite into a dense luminous consciousness, \s{caitanyaghana} or \s{cidghana}, the seed-state
of the divine consciousness in which are contained living and concrete all the immutable principles of the divine
being and all the inviolable truths of the divine conscious-idea and nature. Its third power brings or looses out
these things by the effective ideation, vision, authentic identities of the divine knowledge, movement of the divine
will-force, vibration of the divine delight intensities into a universal harmony, an illimitable diversity, a manifold
rhythm of their powers, forms and interplay of living consequences. The mental Purusha rising into the
\s{vij\~n\=anamaya} must ascend into these three powers. It must turn by conversion of its movements into the
movements of the gnosis its mental perception, ideation, will, pleasure into radiances of the divine knowledge,
pulsations of the divine will-force, waves and floods of the divine delight-seas. It must convert its conscious stuff
of mental nature into the \s{cidghana} or dense self-luminous consciousness. It must transform its conscious
substance into a gnostic self or Truth-self of infinite Sachchidananda. These three movements are described in
the Isha Upanishad, the first as \s{vy\=uha}, the marshalling of the rays of the Sun of gnosis in the order of the
Truth-consciousness, the second as \s{sam\=uha}, the gathering together of the rays into the body of the Sun of
gnosis, the third as the vision of that Sun's fairest form of all in which the soul most intimately possesses its
oneness with the infinite Purusha.
\note{\s{S\=urya ra\'sm\=in vy\=uha sam\=uha tejo yat te kaly\=a\,natama\.m r\=upa\.m tat te pa\'sy\=ami yo 's\=av asau puru\,sa\,h so
'ham asmi.} The Veda describes the \s{vij\~n\=ana} plane as \s{\,rta\.m satya\.m b\,rhat}, the Right, Truth, Vast, the
same triple idea differently expressed. \s{\,Rtam} is the action of the divine knowledge, will and joy in the lines of
the truth, the play of the truth-consciousness. \s{Satyam} is the truth of being which so acts, the dynamic
essence of the truth-consciousness. \s{B\,rhat} is the infinity of Sachchidananda out of which the other two
proceed and in which they are founded.} The Supreme above, in him, around, everywhere and the soul dwelling
in the Supreme and one with it,—the infinite power and truth of the Divine concentrated in his own concentrated
luminous soul nature,—
Page 486

a radiant activity of the divine knowledge, will and joy perfect in the natural action of the Prakriti,—this is the
fundamental experience of the mental being transformed and fulfilled and sublimated in the perfection of the
gnosis.
Page 487

\par
\hn Chapter XXIII
\par
\ht The Conditions of Attainment\nl to the Gnosis
\par\drop Knowledge is the first principle of the Vijnana, but knowledge is not its only power. The
Truth-consciousness, like every other plane, founds itself upon that particular principle which is naturally the key
of all its motions; but it is not limited by it, it contains all the other powers of existence. Only the character and
working of these other powers is modified and moulded into conformity with its own original and dominant law;
intelligence, life, body, will, consciousness, bliss are all luminous, awake, instinct with divine knowledge. This is
indeed the process of Purusha-Prakriti everywhere; it is the key-movement of all the hierarchy and graded
harmonies of manifested existence.
\par In the mental being mind-sense or intelligence is the original and dominant principle. The mental being in the
mind-world where he is native is in his central and determining nature intelligence; he is a centre of intelligence, a
massed movement of intelligence, a receptive and radiating action of intelligence. He has the intelligent sense of
his own existence, the intelligent sense of other existence than his own, the intelligent sense of his own nature
and activities and the activities of others, the intelligent sense of the nature of things and persons and their
relations with himself and each other. That makes up his experience of existence. He has no other knowledge of
existence, no knowledge of life and matter except as they make themselves sensible to him and capable of being
seized by his mental intelligence; what he does not sense and conceive, is to him practically non-existent, or at
least alien to his world and his nature.
\par Man is in his principle a mental being, but not one living in a mind world, but in a dominantly physical
existence; his is
Page 488

a mind cased in Matter and conditioned by Matter. Therefore he has to start with the action of the physical
senses which are all channels of material contact; he does not start with the mind-sense. But even so he does not
and cannot make free use of anything conveyed by these physical organs until and unless they are taken hold of
by the mind-sense and turned into stuff and value of his intelligent being. What is in the lower subhuman
submental world a pranic, a nervous, a dynamic action and reaction that proceeds very well without any need of
translation into mind-terms or government by mind, has in him to be raised and offered to some kind of
intelligence. In order to be characteristically human it has to become first a sense of force, sense of desire, sense
of will, sense of intelligent will-action or mentally conscious sense of force-action. His lower delight of being
translates itself into a sense of mental or mentalised vital or physical pleasure and its perversion pain, or into a
mental or mentalised feeling-sensation of liking and disliking, or into an intelligence of delight and failure of
delight,—all phenomena of the intelligent mind-sense. So too that which is above him and that which is around
him and in which he lives,—God, the universal being, the cosmic Forces,—are non-existent and unreal to him
until his mind awakes to them and gets, not yet their true truth, but some idea, observation, inference, imagination
of things supersensuous, some mental sense of the Infinite, some intelligent interpreting consciousness of the
forces of the superself above and around him.
\par All changes when we pass from mind to gnosis; for there a direct inherent knowledge is the central
principle. The gnostic (\s{vij\~n\=anamaya}) being is in its character a truth-consciousness, a centre and
circumference of the truth-vision of things, a massed movement or subtle body of gnosis. Its action is a
self-fulfilling and radiating action of the truth-power of things according to the inner law of their deepest truest
self and nature. This truth of things at which we must arrive before we can enter into the gnosis,—for in that all
exists and from that all originates on the gnostic plane,—is, first of all, a truth of unity, of oneness, but of unity
originating diversity, unity in multiplicity and still unity
Page 489

always, an indefeasible oneness. State of gnosis, the condition of \s{vij\~n\=anamaya} being, is impossible without an
ample and close self-identification of ourselves with all existence and with all existences, a universal
pervasiveness, a universal comprehension or containing, a certain all-in-allness. The gnostic Purusha has
normally the consciousness of itself as infinite, normally too the consciousness of containing the world in itself
and exceeding it; it is not like the divided mental being normally bound to a consciousness that feels itself
contained in the world and a part of it. It follows that a deliverance from the limiting and imprisoning ego is the
first elementary step towards the being of the gnosis; for so long as we live in the ego, it is idle to hope for this
higher reality, this vast self-consciousness, this true self-knowledge. The least reversion to ego-thought,
ego-action, ego-will brings back the consciousness tumbling out of such gnostic Truth as it has attained into the
falsehoods of the divided mind-nature. A secure universality of being is the very basis of this luminous higher
consciousness. Abandoning all rigid separateness (but getting instead a certain transcendent overlook or
independence) we have to feel ourselves one with all things and beings, to identify ourselves with them, to
become aware of them as ourselves, to feel their being as our own, to admit their consciousness as part of ours,
to contact their energy as intimate to our energy, to learn how to be one self with all. That oneness is not indeed
all that is needed, but it is a first condition and without it there is no gnosis.
\par This universality is impossible to achieve in its completeness so long as we continue to feel ourselves, as we
now feel, a consciousness lodged in an individual mind, life and body. There has to be a certain elevation of the
Purusha out of the physical and even out of the mental into the \s{vij\~n\=anamaya} body. No longer can the brain
nor its corresponding mental “lotus” remain the centre of our thinking, no longer the heart nor its corresponding
“lotus” the originating centre of our emotional and sensational being. The conscious centre of our being, our
thought, our will and action, even the original force of our sensations and emotions rise out of the body and mind
and take a free station above them. No longer have we the sensation of living in the body, but
Page 490

are above it as its lord, possessor or Ishwara and at the same time encompass it with a wider consciousness than
that of the imprisoned physical sense. Now we come to realise with a very living force of reality, normal and
continuous, what the sages meant when they spoke of the soul carrying the body or when they said that the soul
is not in the body, but the body in the soul. It is from above the body and not from the brain that we shall ideate
and will; the brain-action will become only a response and movement of the physical machinery to the shock of
the thought-force and will-force from above. All will be originated from above; from above, all that corresponds
in gnosis to our present mental activity takes place.
\note{Many, if not all, of these conditions of the gnostic change can and indeed have to be attained long before
we reach the gnosis,—but imperfectly at first as if by a reflection,—in higher mind itself, and more completely in
what we may call an overmind consciousness between mentality and gnosis.}
\par But this centre and this action are free, not bound, not dependent on the physical machine, not clamped to a
narrow ego-sense. It is not involved in body; it is not shut up in a separated individuality feeling out for clumsy
contacts with the world outside or groping inward for its own deeper spirit. For in this great transformation we
begin to have a consciousness not shut up in a generating box, but diffused freely and extending self-existently
everywhere; there is or may be a centre, but it is a convenience for individual action, not rigid, not constitutive or
separative. The very nature of our conscious activities is henceforth universal; one with those of the universal
being, it proceeds from universality to a supple and variable individualisation. It has become the awareness of an
infinite being who acts always universally though with emphasis on an individual formation of its energies. But
this emphasis is differential rather than separative, and this formation is no longer what we now understand by
individuality; there is no longer a petty limited constructed person shut up in the formula of his own mechanism.
This state of consciousness is so abnormal to our present mode of being that to the rational man who does not
possess it it may seem impossible or even a state of alienation; but once
Page 491

possessed it vindicates itself even to the mental intelligence by its greater calm, freedom, light, power, effectivity
of will, verifiable truth of ideation and feeling. For this condition begins already on the higher levels of liberated
mind, and can therefore be partly sensed and understood by mind-intelligence, but it rises to perfect
self-possession only when it leaves behind the mental levels, only in the supramental gnosis.
\par In this state of consciousness the infinite becomes to us the primal, the actual reality, the one thing
immediately and sensibly true. It becomes impossible for us to think of or realise the finite apart from our
fundamental sense of the infinite, in which alone the finite can live, can form itself, can have any reality or
duration. So long as this finite mind and body are to our consciousness the first fact of our existence and the
foundation of all our thinking, feeling and willing and so long as things finite are the normal reality from which we
can rise occasionally, or even frequently, to an idea and sense of the infinite, we are still very far away from the
gnosis. In the plane of the gnosis the infinite is at once our normal consciousness of being, its first fact, our
sensible substance. It is very concretely to us there the foundation from which everything finite forms itself and
its boundless incalculable forces are the origination of all our thought, will and delight. But this infinite is not only
an infinite of pervasion or of extension in which everything forms and happens. Behind that immeasurable
extension the gnostic consciousness is always aware of a spaceless inner infinite. It is through this double infinite
that we shall arrive at the essential being of Sachchidananda, the highest self of our own being and the totality of
our cosmic existence. There is opened to us an illimitable existence which we feel as if it were an infinity above
us to which we attempt to rise and an infinity around us into which we strive to dissolve our separate existence.
Afterwards we widen into it and rise into it; we break out of the ego into its largeness and are that for ever. If
this liberation is achieved, its power can take, if so we will, increasing possession of our lower being also until
even our lowest and perversest activities are refashioned into the truth of the Vijnana.
Page 492

\par This is the basis, this sense of the infinite and possession by the infinite, and only when it is achieved, can we
progress towards some normality of the supramental ideation, perception, sense, identity, awareness. For even
this sense of the infinite is only a first foundation and much more has to be done before the consciousness can
become dynamically gnostic. The supramental knowledge is the play of a supreme light; there are many other
lights, other levels of knowledge higher than human mind which can open in us and receive or reflect something
of that effulgence even before we rise into the gnosis. But to command or wholly possess it we must first enter
into and become the being of the supreme light, our consciousness must be transformed into that consciousness,
its principle and power of self-awareness and all-awareness by identity must be the very stuff of our existence.
For our means and ways of knowledge and action must necessarily be according to the nature of our
consciousness and it is the consciousness that must radically change if we are to command and not only be
occasionally visited by that higher power of knowledge. But it is not confined to a higher thought or the action of
a sort of divine reason. It takes up all our present means of knowledge immensely extended, active and effective
where they are now debarred, blind, infructuous, and turns them into a high and intense perceptive activity of the
Vijnana. Thus it takes up our sense action and illumines it even in its ordinary field so that we get a true sense of
things. But also it enables the mind-sense to have a direct perception of the inner as well as the outer
phenomenon, to feel and receive or perceive, for instance, the thoughts, feelings, sensations, the nervous
reactions of the object on which it is turned.
\note{This power, says Patanjali, comes by “\s{sa\.myama}” on an object. That is for the mentality, in the gnosis
there is no need of \s{sa\.myama}. For this kind of perception is the natural action of the Vijnana.} It uses the
subtle senses as well as the physical and saves them from their errors. It gives us the knowledge, the experience
of planes of existence other than the material to which our ordinary mentality is ignorantly attached and it
enlarges the world for us. It transforms similarly the
Page 493

sensations and gives them their full intensity as well as their full holding-power; for in our normal mentality the
full intensity is impossible because the power to hold and sustain vibrations beyond a certain point is denied to it,
mind and body would both break under the shock or the prolonged strain. It takes up too the element of
knowledge in our feelings and emotions,—for our feelings too contain a power of knowledge and a power of
effectuation which we do not recognise and do not properly develop,—and delivers them at the same time from
their limitations and from their errors and perversions. For in all things the gnosis is the Truth, the Right, the
highest Law, \s{dev\=an\=am adabdh\=ani vrat\=ani}.
\par Knowledge and Force or Will—for all conscious force is will—are the twin sides of the action of
consciousness. In our mentality they are divided. The idea comes first, the will comes stumbling after it or rebels
against it or is used as its imperfect tool with imperfect results; or else the will starts up first with a blind or
half-seeing idea in it and works out something in confusion of which we get the right understanding afterwards.
There is no oneness, no full understanding between these powers in us; or else there is no perfect
correspondence of initiation with effectuation. Nor is the individual will in harmony with the universal; it tries to
reach beyond it or falls short of it or deviates from and strives against it. It knows not the times and seasons of
the Truth, nor its degrees and measures. The Vijnana takes up the will and puts it first into harmony and then into
oneness with the truth of the supramental knowledge. In this knowledge the idea in the individual is one with the
idea in the universal, because both are brought back to the truth of the supreme Knowledge and the transcendent
Will. The gnosis takes up not only our intelligent will, but our wishes, desires, even what we call the lower
desires, the instincts, the impulses, the reachings out of sense and sensation and it transforms them. They cease
to be wishes and desires, because they cease first to be personal and then cease to be that struggling after the
ungrasped which we mean by craving and desire. No longer blind or half-blind reachings out of the instinctive or
intelligent mentality, they
Page 494

are transformed into a various action of the Truth-will; and that will acts with an inherent knowledge of the right
measures of its decreed action and therefore with an effectivity unknown to our mental willing. Therefore too in
the action of the \s{vij\~n\=anamaya} will there is no place for sin; for all sin is an error of the will, a desire and act
of the Ignorance.
\par When desire ceases entirely, grief and all inner suffering also cease. The Vijnana takes up not only our parts
of knowledge and will, but our parts of affection and delight and changes them into action of the divine Ananda.
For if knowledge and force are the twin sides or powers of the action of consciousness, delight, Ananda—which
is something higher than what we call pleasure—is the very stuff of consciousness and the natural result of the
interaction of knowledge and will, force and self-awareness. Both pleasure and pain, both joy and grief are
deformations caused by the disturbance of harmony between our consciousness and the force it applies, between
our knowledge and will, a breaking up of their oneness by a descent to a lower plane in which they are limited,
divided in themselves, restrained from their full and proper action, at odds with other-force, other-consciousness,
other-knowledge, other-will. The Vijnana sets this to rights by the power of its truth and a wholesale restoration
to oneness and harmony, to the Right and the highest Law. It takes up all our emotions and turns them into
various forms of love and delight, even our hatreds, repulsions, causes of suffering. It finds out or reveals the
meaning they missed and by missing it became the perversions they are; it restores our whole nature to the
eternal Good. It deals similarly with our perceptions and sensations and reveals all the delight that they seek, but
in its truth, not in any perversion and wrong seeking and wrong reception; it teaches even our lower impulses to
lay hold on the Divine and Infinite in the appearances after which they run. All this is done not in the values of
the lower being, but by a lifting up of the mental, vital, material into the inalienable purity, the natural intensity, the
continual ecstasy, one yet manifold, of the divine Ananda.
\par Thus the being of Vijnana is in all its activities a play of
Page 495

perfected knowledge-power, will-power, delight-power, raised to a higher than the mental, vital and bodily level.
All-pervasive, universalised, freed from egoistic personality and individuality, it is the play of a higher Self, a
higher consciousness and therefore a higher force and higher delight of being. All that acts in the Vijnana in the
purity, in the right, in the truth of the superior or divine Prakriti. Its powers may often seem to be what are called
in ordinary Yogic parlance siddhis, by the Europeans occult powers, shunned and dreaded by devotees and by
many Yogins as snares, stumbling-blocks, diversions from the true seeking after the Divine. But they have that
character and are dangerous here because they are sought in the lower being, abnormally, by the ego for an
egoistic satisfaction. In the Vijnana they are neither occult nor siddhis, but the open, unforced and normal play of
its nature. The Vijnana is the Truth-power and Truth-action of the divine Being in its divine identities, and, when
this acts through the individual lifted to the gnostic plane, it fulfils itself unperverted, without fault or egoistic
reaction, without diversion from the possession of the Divine. There the individual is no longer the ego, but the
free Jiva domiciled in the higher divine nature of which he is a portion, \s{par\=a prak\,rtir j\=ivabh\=ut\=a}, the nature of
the supreme and universal Self seen indeed in the play of multiple individuality but without the veil of ignorance,
with self-knowledge, in its multiple oneness, in the truth of its divine Shakti.
\par In the Vijnana the right relation and action of Purusha and Prakriti are found, because there they become
unified and the Divine is no longer veiled in Maya. All is his action. The Jiva no longer says “I think, I act, I
desire, I feel”; he does not even say like the sadhaka striving after unity but before he has reached it, “As
appointed by Thee seated in my heart, I act.” For the heart, the centre of the mental consciousness is no longer
the centre of origination but only a blissful channel. He is rather aware of the Divine seated above, lord of all,
\s{adhi\,s\,thita}, as well as acting within him. And seated himself in that higher being, \s{par\=ardhe},
\s{paramasy\=a\.m par\=avati}, he can say truly and boldly, “God himself by his Prakriti knows, acts, loves, takes
delight
Page 496

through my individuality and its figures and fulfils there in its higher and divine measures the multiple \s{l\=il\=a}
which the Infinite for ever plays in the universality which is himself for ever.”
Page 497

\par
\hn Chapter XXIV
\par
\ht Gnosis and Ananda
\par\drop The ascent to the gnosis, the possession of something of the gnostic consciousness must elevate the
soul of man and sublimate his life in the world into a glory of light and power and bliss and infinity that can seem
in comparison with the lame action and limited realisations of our present mental and physical existence the very
status and dynamis of a perfection final and absolute. And it is a true perfection, such as nothing before it has yet
been in the ascension of the spirit. For even the highest spiritual realisation on the plane of mentality has in it
something top-heavy, one-sided and exclusive; even the widest mental spirituality is not wide enough and it is
marred too by its imperfect power of self-expression in life. And yet in comparison with what is beyond it, this
too, this first gnostic splendour is only a bright passage to a more perfect perfection. It is the secure and shining
step from which we can happily mount still upwards into the absolute infinities which are the origin and the goal
of the incarnating spirit. In this farther ascension the gnosis does not disappear, but reaches rather its own
supreme Light out of which it has descended to mediate between mind and the supreme Infinite.
\par The Upanishad tells us that after the knowledge-self above the mental is possessed and all the lower selves
have been drawn up into it, there is another and last step of all still left to us—though one might ask, is it eternally
the last or only the last practically conceivable or at all necessary for us now?—to take up our gnostic existence
into the Bliss-Self and there complete the spiritual self-discovery of the divine Infinite. Ananda, a supreme Bliss
eternal, far other and higher in its character than the highest human joy or pleasure, is the essential and original
nature of the spirit. In Ananda our spirit will find its true self, in Ananda its essential consciousness, in Ananda
the absolute power of its
Page 498

existence. The embodied soul's entry into this highest absolute, unlimited, unconditional bliss of the spirit is the
infinite liberation and the infinite perfection. It is true that something of this bliss can be enjoyed by reflection, by
a qualified descent even on the lower planes where the Purusha plays with his modified and qualified Nature.
There can be the experience of a spiritual and boundless Ananda on the plane of matter, on the plane of life, on
the plane of mind as well as on the gnostic truth-plane of knowledge and above it. And the Yogin who enters into
these lesser realisations, may find them so complete and compelling that he will imagine there is nothing greater,
nothing beyond it. For each of the divine principles contains in itself the whole potentiality of all the other six
notes of our being; each plane of Nature can have its own perfection of these notes under its own conditions.
But the integral perfection can come only by a mounting ascent of the lowest into the highest and an incessant
descent of the highest into the lowest till all becomes one at once solid block and plastic sea-stuff of the Truth
infinite and eternal.
\par The very physical consciousness in man, the \s{annamaya puru\,sa}, can without this supreme ascent and
integral descent yet reflect and enter into the self of Sachchidananda. It can do it either by a reflection of the
Soul in physical Nature, its bliss, power and infinity secret but still present here, or by losing its separate sense of
substance and existence in the Self within or without it. The result is a glorified sleep of the physical mind in
which the physical being forgets itself in a kind of conscious Nirvana or else moves about like a thing inert in the
hands of Nature, \s{ja\,davat}, like a leaf in the wind, or otherwise a state of pure happy and free irresponsibility
of action, \s{b\=alavat}, a divine childhood. But this comes without the higher glories of knowledge and delight
which belong to the same status upon a more exalted level. It is an inert realisation of Sachchidananda in which
there is neither any mastery of the Prakriti by the Purusha nor any sublimation of Nature into her own supreme
power, the infinite glories of the Para Shakti. Yet these two, this mastery and this sublimation, are the two gates
of perfection, the splendid doors into the supreme Eternal.
Page 499

\par The life soul and life consciousness in man, \s{pr\=a\,namaya puru\,sa}, can in the same way directly reflect and
enter into the self of Sachchidananda by a large and splendid and blissful reflection of the Soul in universal Life
or by losing its separate sense of life and existence in the vast Self within or without it. The result is either a
profound state of sheer self-oblivion or else an action driven irresponsibly by the life nature, an exalted
enthusiasm of self-abandonment to the great world-energy in its vitalistic dance. The outer being lives in a
God-possessed frenzy careless of itself and the world, \s{unmattavat}, or with an entire disregard whether of the
conventions and proprieties of fitting human action or of the harmony and rhythms of a greater Truth. It acts as
the unbound vital being, \s{pi\'s\=acavat}, the divine maniac or else the divine demoniac. Here too there is no
mastery or supreme sublimation of nature. There is only a joyful static possession by the Self within us and an
unregulated dynamic possession by the physical and the vital Nature without us.
\par The mind soul and mind consciousness in man, \s{manomaya puru\,sa}, can in the same direct way reflect
and enter into Sachchidananda by a reflection of the Soul as it mirrors itself in the nature of pure universal mind
luminous, unwalled, happy, plastic, illimitable, or by absorption in the vast free unconditioned uncentred Self within
it and without it. The result is either the immobile cessation of all mind and action or a desire-free unbound action
watched by the unparticipating inner Witness. The mental being becomes the eremite soul alone in the world and
careless of all human ties or the saint soul that lives in a rapturous God-nearness or felicitous identity and in joyful
relations of pure love and ecstasy towards all creatures. The mental being may even realise the Self in all three
planes together. Then he is all these things alternately, successively or at once. Or he may transform the lower
forms into manifestations of the higher state; he may draw upward the childlikeness or the inert irresponsibility of
the free physical mind or the free vital mind's divine madness and carelessness of all rules, proprieties, harmonies
and colour or disguise with them the ecstasy of the saint or the solitary liberty of the wandering eremite. Here
again there is no mastery, no
Page 500

sublimation of the Nature by the soul in the world, but a double possession, by the freedom and delight of the
mental-spiritual infinite within and without by the happy, natural and unregulated play of the mind-Nature. But
since the mental being is capable of receiving the gnosis in a way in which the life soul and physical soul cannot
receive it, since he can accept it with knowledge though only the limited knowledge of a mental response, he may
to a certain extent govern by its light his outer action or, if not that, at least bathe and purify in it his will and his
thinkings. But Mind can arrive only at a compromise between the infinite within and the finite nature without; it
cannot pour the infinity of the inner being's knowledge and power and bliss with any sense of fullness into its
external action which remains always inadequate. Still it is content and free because it is the Lord within who
takes up the responsibility of the action adequate or inadequate, assumes its guidance and fixes its consequence.
\par But the gnostic soul, the \s{vij\~n\=anamaya puru\,sa}, is the first to participate not only in the freedom, but in the
power and sovereignty of the Eternal. For it receives the fullness, it has the sense of plenitude of the Godhead in
its action; it shares the free, splendid and royal march of the Infinite, is a vessel of the original knowledge, the
immaculate power, the inviolable bliss, transmutes all life into the eternal Light and the eternal Fire and the
eternal Wine of the nectar. It possesses the infinite of the Self and it possesses the infinite of Nature. It does not
so much lose as find its nature self in the self of the Infinite. On the other planes to which the mental being has
easier access, man finds God in himself and himself in God; he becomes divine in essence rather than in person
or nature. In the gnosis, even the mentalised gnosis, the Divine Eternal possesses, changes and stamps the
human symbol, envelops and partly finds himself in the person and nature. The mental being at most receives or
reflects that which is true, divine and eternal; the gnostic soul reaches a true identity, possesses the spirit and
power of the truth-Nature. In the gnosis the dualism of Purusha and Prakriti, Soul and Nature, two separate
powers complementary to each other, the great truth of the Sankhyas founded on the practical
Page 501

truth of our present natural existence, disappears in their biune entity, the dynamic mystery of the occult
Supreme. The Truth-being is the Hara-Gauri
\note{The biune body of the Lord and his Spouse, Ishwara and Shakti, the right half male, the left half female.}
of the Indian iconological symbol; it is the double Power masculine-feminine born from and supported by the
supreme Shakti of the Supreme.
\par Therefore the truth-soul does not arrive at self-oblivion in the Infinite; it comes to an eternal self-possession
in the Infinite. Its action is not irregular; it is a perfect control in an infinite freedom. In the lower planes the soul
is naturally subject to \NH Nature and the regulating principle is found in the lower nature; all regulation there
depends on the acceptance of a strict subjection to the law of the finite. If the soul on these planes withdraws
from that law into the liberty of the infinite, it loses its natural centre and becomes centreless in a cosmic
infinitude; it forfeits the living harmonic principle by which its external being was till then regulated and it finds no
other. The personal nature or what is left of it merely continues mechanically for a while its past movements, or
it dances in the gusts and falls of the universal energy that acts on the individual system rather than in that
system, or it strays in the wild steps of an irresponsible ecstasy, or it remains inert and abandoned by the breath
of the Spirit that was within it. If on the other hand the soul moves in its impulse of freedom towards the
discovery of another and divine centre of control through which the Infinite can consciously govern its own
action in the individual, it is moving towards the gnosis where that centre pre-exists, the centre of an eternal
harmony and order. It is when he ascends above mind and life to the gnosis that the Purusha becomes the
master of his own nature because subject only to supreme Nature. For there force or will is the exact
counterpart, the perfect dynamis of the divine knowledge. And that knowledge is not merely the eye of the
Witness, it is the immanent and compelling gaze of the Ishwara. Its luminous governing power, a power not to be
hedged in or denied, imposes its self-expressive force on all the
Page 502

action and makes true and radiant and authentic and inevitable every movement and impulse.
\par The gnosis does not reject the realisations of the lower planes; for it is not an annihilation or extinction, not a
Nirvana but a sublime fulfilment of our manifested Nature. It possesses the first realisations under its own
conditions after it has transformed them and made them elements of a divine order. The gnostic soul is the child,
but the king-child;
\note{So Heraclitus, “The kingdom is of the child.”} here is the royal and eternal childhood whose toys are the
worlds and all universal Nature is the miraculous garden of the play that tires never. The gnosis takes up the
condition of divine inertia; but this is no longer the inertia of the subject soul driven by Nature like a fallen leaf in
the breath of the Lord. It is the happy passivity bearing an unimaginable intensity of action and Ananda of the
Nature-Soul at once driven by the bliss of the mastering Purusha and aware of herself as the supreme Shakti
above and around him and mastering and carrying him blissfully on her bosom for ever. This biune being of
Purusha-Prakriti is as if a flaming Sun and body of divine Light self-carried in its orbit by its own inner
consciousness and power at one with the universal, at one with a supreme Transcendence. Its madness is a wise
madness of Ananda, the incalculable ecstasy of a supreme consciousness and power vibrating with an infinite
sense of freedom and intensity in its divine life-movements. Its action is supra-rational and therefore to the
rational mind which has not the key it seems a colossal madness. And yet this that seems madness is a wisdom
in action that only baffles the mind by the liberty and richness of its contents and the infinite complexity in
fundamental simplicity of its motions, it is the very method of the Lord of the worlds, a thing no intellectual
interpretation can fathom,—a dance this also, a whirl of mighty energies, but the Master of the dance holds the
hands of His energies and keeps them to the rhythmic order, the self-traced harmonic circles of his Rasa-lila.
The gnostic soul is not bound any more than the divine demoniac by the petty conventions and proprieties of the
Page 503

normal human life or the narrow rules through which it makes some shift to accommodate itself with the
perplexing dualities of the lower nature and tries to guide its steps among the seeming contradictions of the world,
to avoid its numberless stumbling-blocks and to foot with gingerly care around its dangers and pitfalls. The
gnostic supramental life is abnormal to us because it is free to all the hardihoods and audacious delights of a soul
dealing fearlessly and even violently with Nature, but yet is it the very normality of the infinite and all governed
by the law of the Truth in its exact unerring process. It obeys the law of a self-possessed Knowledge, Love,
Delight in an innumerable Oneness. It seems abnormal only because its rhythm is not measurable by the faltering
beats of the mind, but yet it steps in a wonderful and transcendent measure.
\par And what then is the necessity of a still higher step and what difference is there between the soul in gnosis
and the soul in the Bliss? There is no essential difference, but yet a difference, because there is a transfer to
another consciousness and a certain reversal in position,—for at each step of the ascent from Matter to the
highest Existence there is a reversal of consciousness. The soul no longer looks up to something beyond it, but is
in it and from it looks down on all that it was before. On all planes indeed the Ananda can be discovered,
because everywhere it exists and is the same. Even there is a repetition of the Ananda plane in each lower world
of consciousness. But in the lower planes not only is it reached by a sort of dissolution into it of the pure mind or
the life-sense or the physical awareness, but it is, as it were, itself diluted by the dissolved form of mind, life or
matter, held in the dilution and turned into a poor thinness wonderful to the lower consciousness but not
comparable to its true intensities. The gnosis has on the contrary a dense light of essential
consciousness
\note{\s{cidghana}.} in which the intense fullness of the Ananda can be. And when the form of gnosis is
dissolved into the Ananda, it is not annulled altogether, but undergoes a natural change by which the soul is
carried up into its last and absolute
Page 504

freedom; for it casts itself into the absolute existence of the spirit and is enlarged into its own entirely
self-existent bliss infinitudes. The gnosis has the infinite and absolute as the conscious source, accompaniment,
condition, standard, field and atmosphere of all its activities, it possesses it as its base, fount, constituent material,
indwelling and inspiring Presence; but in its action it seems to stand out from it as its operation, as the rhythmical
working of its activities, as a divine Maya
\note{Not in the sense of illusion, but in the original Vedic significance of the word Maya. All in the gnostic
existence is real, spiritually concrete, eternally verifiable.} or Wisdom-Formation of the Eternal. Gnosis is the
divine Knowledge-Will of the divine Consciousness-Force; it is harmonic consciousness and action of
Prakriti-Purusha full of the delight of the divine existence. In the Ananda the knowledge goes back from these
willed harmonies into pure self-consciousness, the will dissolves into pure transcendent force and both are taken
up into the pure delight of the Infinite. The basis of the gnostic existence is the self-stuff and self-form of the
Ananda.
\par This in the ascension takes place because there is here completed the transition to the absolute unity of
which the gnosis is the decisive step, but not the final resting-place. In the gnosis the soul is aware of its infinity
and lives in it, yet it lives also in a working centre for the individual play of the Infinite. It realises its identity with
all existences, but it keeps a distinction without difference by which it can have also the contact with them in a
certain diverseness. This is that distinction for the joy of contact which in the mind becomes not only difference,
but in its self-experience division from our other selves, in its spiritual being a sense of loss of self one with us in
others and a reaching after the felicity it has forfeited, in life a compromise between egoistic self-absorption and
a blind seeking out for the lost oneness. In its infinite consciousness, the gnostic soul creates a sort of voluntary
limitation for its own wisdom-purposes; it has even its particular luminous aura of being in which it moves,
although beyond that it enters into all things and identifies itself with all being and all existences. In the Ananda all
is reversed,
Page 505

the centre disappears. In the bliss nature there is no centre, nor any voluntary or imposed circumference, but all
is, all are one equal being, one identical spirit. The bliss soul finds and feels itself everywhere; it has no mansion,
is \s{aniketa}, or has the all for its mansion, or, if it likes, it has all things for its many mansions open to each
other for ever. All other selves are entirely its own selves, in action as well as in essence. The joy of contact in
diverse oneness becomes altogether the joy of absolute identity in innumerable oneness. Existence is no longer
formulated in the terms of the Knowledge, because the known and knowledge and the knower are wholly one
self here and, since all possesses all in an intimate identity beyond the closest closeness, there is no need of what
we call knowledge. All the consciousness is of the bliss of the Infinite, all power is power of the bliss of the
Infinite, all forms and activities are forms and activities of the bliss of the Infinite. In this absolute truth of its
being the eternal soul of Ananda lives, here deformed by contrary phenomena, there brought back and
transfigured into their reality.
\par The soul lives: it is not abolished, it is not lost in a featureless Indefinite. For on every plane of our existence
the same principle holds; the soul may fall asleep in a trance of self-absorption, dwell in an ineffable intensity of
God-possession, live in the highest glory of its own plane,—the Anandaloka, Brahmaloka, Vaikuntha, Goloka of
various Indian systems,—even turn upon the lower worlds to fill them with its own light and power and beatitude.
In the eternal worlds and more and more in all worlds above Mind these states exist in each other. For they are
not separate; they are coexistent, even coincident powers of the consciousness of the Absolute. The Divine on
the Ananda plane is not incapable of a world-play or self-debarred from any expression of its glories. On the
contrary, as the Upanishad insists, the Ananda is the true creative principle. For all takes birth from this divine
Bliss;
\note{Therefore the world of the Ananda is called the Janaloka, in the double sense of birth and delight.} all is
pre-existent in it as an absolute truth of existence which the Vijnana brings out and subjects to
Page 506

voluntary limitation by the Idea and the law of the Idea. In the Ananda all law ceases and there is an absolute
freedom without binding term or limit. It is superior to all principles and in one and the same motion the enjoyer of
all principles; it is free from all gunas and the enjoyer of its own infinite gunas; it is above all forms and the
builder and enjoyer of all its self-forms and figures. This unimaginable completeness is what the spirit is, the spirit
transcendent and universal, and to be one in bliss with the transcendent and universal spirit is for the soul too to
be that and nothing less. Necessarily, since there is on this plane the absolute and the play of absolutes, it is
ineffable by any of the conceptions of our mind or by signs of the phenomenal or ideal realities of which
mind-conceptions are the figures in our intelligence. These realities are themselves indeed only relative symbols
of those ineffable absolutes. The symbol, the expressive reality, may give an idea, a perception, sense, vision,
contact even of the thing itself to us, but at last we get beyond it to the thing it symbolises, transcend idea, vision,
contact, pierce through the ideal and pass to the real realities, the identical, the supreme, the timeless and eternal,
the infinitely infinite.
\par Our first absorbing impulse when we become inwardly aware of something entirely beyond what we now
are and know and are powerfully attracted to it, is to get away from the present actuality and dwell in that higher
reality altogether. The extreme form of this attraction when we are drawn to the supreme Existence and the
infinite Ananda is the condemnation of the lower and the finite as an illusion and an aspiration to Nirvana in the
beyond,—the passion for dissolution, immersion, extinction in the Spirit. But the real dissolution, the true
\s{nirv\=a\,na} is the release of all that is bindingly characteristic of the lower into the larger being of the Higher, the
conscious possession of the living symbol by the living Real. We discover in the end that not only is that higher
Reality the cause of all the rest, not only it embraces and exists in all the rest, but as more and more we possess
it, all this rest is transformed in our soul-experience into a superior value and becomes the means of a richer
expression of the Real, a more many-sided
Page 507

communion with the Infinite, a larger ascent to the Supreme. Finally, we get close to the absolute and its supreme
values which are the absolutes of all things. We lose the passion for release, \s{mumuk\,sutva}, which till then
actuated us, because we are now intimately near to that which is ever free, that which is neither attracted into
attachment by what binds us now nor afraid of what to us seems to be bondage. It is only by the loss of the
bound soul's exclusive passion for its freedom that there can come an absolute liberation of our nature. The
Divine attracts the soul of man to him by various lures; all of them are born of its own relative and imperfect
conceptions of bliss; all are its ways of seeking for the Ananda, but, if clung to till the end, miss the inexpressible
truth of those surpassing felicities. First in order comes the lure of an earthly reward, a prize of material,
intellectual, ethical or other joy in the terrestrial mind and body. A second remoter greater version of the same
fruitful error is the hope of a heavenly bliss, far exceeding these earthly rewards; the conception of heaven rises
in altitude and purity till it reaches the pure idea of the eternal presence of God or an unending union with the
Eternal. And last we get the subtlest of all lures, an escape from these worldly or heavenly joys and from all
pains and sorrows, effort and trouble and from all phenomenal things, a Nirvana, a self-dissolution in the
Absolute, an Ananda of cessation and ineffable peace. In the end all these toys of the mind have to be
transcended. The fear of birth and the desire of escape from birth must entirely fall away from us. For, to repeat
the ancient language, the soul that has realised oneness has no sorrow or shrinking; the spirit that has entered into
the bliss of the Spirit has nought to fear from anyone or anything whatsoever. Fear, desire and sorrow are
diseases of the mind; born of its sense of division and limitation, they cease with the falsehood that begot them.
The Ananda is free from these maladies; it is not the monopoly of the ascetic, it is not born from the disgust of
existence.
\par The bliss soul is not bound to birth or to non-birth; it is not driven by desire of the Knowledge or harassed by
fear of the Ignorance. The supreme bliss Soul has already the Knowledge
Page 508

and transcends all need of knowledge. Not limited in consciousness by the form and the act, it can play with the
manifestation without being imbued with the Ignorance. Already it is taking its part above in the mystery of an
eternal manifestation and here, when the time comes, it will descend into birth without being the slave of
Ignorance chained to the revolutions of the wheel of Nature. For it knows that the purpose and law of the
birth-series is for the soul in the body to rise from plane to plane and substitute always the rule of the higher for
the rule of the lower play even down to the material field. The bliss-soul neither disdains to help that ascent from
above nor fears to descend down the stairs of God into the material birth and there contribute the power of its
own bliss nature to the upward pull of the divine forces. The time for that marvellous hour of the evolving
Time-Spirit is not yet come. Man, generally, cannot yet ascend to the bliss nature; he has first to secure himself
on the higher mental altitudes, to ascend from them to the gnosis. Still less can he bring down all the Bliss-Power
into this terrestrial Nature; he must first cease to be mental man and become superhuman. All he can do now is
to receive something of its power into his soul in greater or less degree, by a diminishing transmission through an
inferior consciousness; but even that gives him the sense of an ecstasy and an unsurpassable beatitude.
\par And what will be the bliss nature when it manifests in a new supramental race? The fully evolved soul will
be one with all beings in the status and dynamic effects of experience of a bliss-consciousness intense and
illimitable. And since love is the effective power and soul-symbol of bliss-oneness he will \NH approach and
enter into this oneness by the gate of universal love, a sublimation of human love at first, a divine love afterwards,
at its summits a thing of beauty, sweetness and splendour now to us inconceivable. He will be one in
bliss-consciousness with all the world-play and its powers and happenings and there will be banished for ever the
sorrow and fear, the hunger and pain of our poor and darkened mental and vital and physical existence. He will
get that power of the bliss-freedom in which all the conflicting principles of our being shall be unified in their
Page 509

absolute values. All evil shall perforce change itself into good; the universal beauty of the All-beautiful will take
possession of its fallen kingdoms; every darkness will be converted into a pregnant glory of light and the discords
which the mind creates between Truth and Good and Beauty, Power and Love and Knowledge will disappear on
the eternal summit, in the infinite extensions where they are always one.
\par The Purusha in mind, life and body is divided from Nature and in conflict with her. He labours to control and
coerce what he can embody of her by his masculine force and is yet subject to her afflicting dualities and in fact
her plaything from top to bottom, beginning to end. In the gnosis he is biune with her, finds as master of his own
nature their reconciliation and harmony by their essential oneness even while he accepts an infinite blissful
subjection, the condition of his mastery and his liberties, to the Supreme in his sovereign divine Nature. In the
tops of the gnosis and in the Ananda he is one with the Prakriti and no longer solely biune with her. There is no
longer the baffling play of Nature with the soul in the Ignorance; all is the conscious play of the soul with itself
and all its selves and the Supreme and the divine Shakti in its own and the infinite bliss nature. This is the
supreme mystery, the highest secret, simple to its own experience, however difficult and complex to our mental
conceptions and the effort of our limited intelligence to understand what is beyond it. In the free infinity of the
self-delight of Sachchidananda there is a play of the divine Child, a \sforced{r\=asa l\=il\=a} of the infinite Lover and its
mystic soul-symbols repeat themselves in characters of beauty and movements and harmonies of delight in a
timeless forever.
Page 510

\par
\hn Chapter XXV
\par
\ht The Higher and the\nl Lower Knowledge
\par\drop We have now completed our view of the path of Knowledge and seen to what it leads. First, the end of
Yoga of Knowledge is God-possession, it is to possess God and be possessed by him through consciousness,
through identification, through reflection of the divine Reality. But not merely in some abstraction away from our
present existence, but here also; therefore to possess the Divine in himself, the Divine in the world, the Divine
within, the Divine in all things and all beings. It is to possess oneness with God and through that to possess also
oneness with the universal, with the cosmos and all existences; therefore to possess the infinite diversity also in
the oneness, but on the basis of oneness and not on the basis of division. It is to possess God in his personality
and his impersonality; in his purity free from qualities and in his infinite qualities; in time and beyond time; in his
action and in his silence; in the finite and in the infinite. It is to possess him not only in pure self, but in all self; not
only in self, but in Nature; not only in spirit, but in supermind, mind, life and body; to possess him with the spirit,
with the mind, with the vital and the physical consciousness; and it is again for all these to be possessed by him,
so that our whole being is one with him, full of him, governed and driven by him. It is, since God is oneness, for
our physical consciousness to be one with the soul and the nature of the material universe; for our life, to be one
with all life; for our mind, to be one with the universal mind; for our spirit, to be identified with the universal spirit.
It is to merge in him in the absolute and find him in all relations.
\par Secondly, it is to put on the divine being and the divine nature. And since God is Sachchidananda, it is to
raise our
Page 511

being into the divine being, our consciousness into the divine consciousness, our energy into the divine energy, our
delight of existence into the divine delight of being. And it is not only to lift ourselves into this higher
consciousness, but to widen into it in all our being, because it is to be found on all the planes of our existence and
in all our members, so that our mental, vital, physical existence shall become full of the divine nature. Our
intelligent mentality is to become a play of the divine knowledge-will, our mental soul-life a play of the divine love
and delight, our vitality a play of the divine life, our physical being a mould of the divine substance. This
God-action in us is to be realised by an opening of ourselves to the divine gnosis and divine Ananda and, in its
fullness, by an ascent into and a permanent dwelling in the gnosis and the Ananda. For though we live physically
on the material plane and in normal outward-going life the mind and soul are preoccupied with material existence,
this externality of our being is not a binding limitation. We can raise our internal consciousness from plane to
plane of the relations of Purusha with Prakriti, and even become, instead of the mental being dominated by the
physical soul and nature, the gnostic being or the bliss-self and assume the gnostic or the bliss nature. And by this
raising of the inner life we can transform our whole outward-going existence; instead of a life dominated by
matter we shall then have a life dominated by spirit with all its circumstances moulded and determined by the
purity of being, the consciousness infinite even in the finite, the divine energy, the divine joy and bliss of the spirit.
\par This is the goal; we have seen also what are the essentials of the method. But here we have first to consider
briefly one side of the question of method which we have hitherto left untouched. In the system of an integral
Yoga the principle must be that all life is a part of the Yoga; but the knowledge which we have been describing
seems to be not the knowledge of what is ordinarily understood as life, but of something behind life. There are
two kinds of knowledge, that which seeks to understand the apparent phenomenon of existence externally, by an
approach from outside, through the intellect,—this is the lower
Page 512

knowledge, the knowledge of the apparent world; secondly, the knowledge which seeks to know the truth of
existence from within, in its source and reality, by spiritual realisation. Ordinarily, a sharp distinction is drawn
between the two, and it is supposed that when we get to the higher knowledge, the God-knowledge, then the rest,
the world-knowledge, becomes of no concern to us: but in reality they are two sides of one seeking. All
knowledge is ultimately the knowledge of God, through himself, through Nature, through her works. Mankind has
first to seek this knowledge through the external life; for until its mentality is sufficiently developed, spiritual
knowledge is not really possible, and in proportion as it is developed, the possibilities of spiritual knowledge
become richer and fuller.
\par Science, art, philosophy, ethics, psychology, the knowledge of man and his past, action itself are means by
which we arrive at the knowledge of the workings of God through Nature and through life. At first it is the
workings of life and forms of Nature which occupy us, but as we go deeper and deeper and get a completer
view and experience, each of these lines brings us face to face with God. Science at its limits, even physical
Science, is compelled to perceive in the end the infinite, the universal, the spirit, the divine intelligence and will in
the material universe. Still more easily must this be the end with the psychic sciences which deal with the
operations of higher and subtler planes and powers of our being and come into contact with the beings and the
phenomena of the worlds behind which are unseen, not sensible by our physical organs, but ascertainable by the
subtle mind and senses. Art leads to the same end; the aesthetic \NH human being intensely preoccupied with
Nature through aesthetic emotion must in the end arrive at spiritual emotion and perceive not only the infinite life,
but the infinite presence within her; preoccupied with beauty in the life of man he must in the end come to see
the divine, the universal, the spiritual in humanity. Philosophy dealing with the principles of things must come to
perceive the Principle of all these principles and investigate its nature, attributes and essential workings. So ethics
must eventually perceive that the law of good which it seeks is the law of God
Page 513

and depends on the being and nature of the Master of the law. Psychology leads from the study of mind and the
soul in living beings to the perception of the one soul and one mind in all things and beings. The history and study
of man like the history and study of Nature lead towards the perception of the eternal and universal Power and
Being whose thought and will work out through the cosmic and human evolution. Action itself forces us into
contact with the divine Power which works through, uses, overrules our actions. The intellect begins to perceive
and understand, the emotions to feel and desire and revere, the will to turn itself to the service of the Divine
without whom Nature and man cannot exist or move and by conscious knowledge of whom alone we can arrive
at our highest possibilities.
\par It is here that Yoga steps in. It begins by using knowledge, emotion and action for the possession of the
Divine. For Yoga is the conscious and perfect seeking of union with the Divine towards which all the rest was an
ignorant and imperfect moving and seeking. At first, then, Yoga separates itself from the action and method of
the lower knowledge. For while this lower knowledge approaches God indirectly from outside and never enters
his secret dwelling-place, Yoga calls us within and \NH approaches him directly; while that seeks him through
the intellect and becomes conscious of him from behind a veil, Yoga seeks him through realisation, lifts the veil
and gets the full vision; where that only feels the presence and the influence, Yoga enters into the presence and
fills itself with the influence; where that is only aware of the workings and through them gets some glimpse of
the Reality, Yoga identifies our inner being with the Reality and sees from that the workings. Therefore the
methods of Yoga are different from the methods of the lower knowledge.
\par The method of Yoga in knowledge must always be a turning of the eye inward and, so far as it looks upon
outer things, a penetrating of the surface appearances to get at the one eternal \NH reality within them. The
lower knowledge is preoccupied with the appearances and workings; it is the first necessity of the higher to get
away from them to the Reality of which they are the appearances and the Being and Power of conscious
existence
Page 514

of which they are the workings. It does this by three movements each necessary to each other, by each of which
the others become complete,—purification, concentration, identification. The object of purification is to make the
whole mental being a clear mirror in which the divine reality can be reflected, a clear vessel and an unobstructing
channel into which the divine presence and through which the divine influence can be poured, a subtilised stuff
which the divine nature can take possession of, new-shape and use to divine issues. For the mental being at
present reflects only the confusions created by the mental and physical view of the world, is a channel only for
the disorders of the ignorant lower nature and full of obstructions and impurities which prevent the higher from
acting; therefore the whole shape of our being is deformed and imperfect, indocile to the highest influences and
turned in its action to ignorant and inferior utilities. It reflects even the world falsely; it is incapable of reflecting
the Divine.
\par Concentration is necessary, first, to turn the whole will and mind from the discursive divagation natural to
them, following a dispersed movement of the thoughts, running after many-branching desires, led away in the
track of the senses and the outward mental response to phenomena: we have to fix the will and the thought on
the eternal and real behind all, and this demands an immense effort, a one-pointed concentration. Secondly, it is
necessary in order to break down the veil which is erected by our ordinary mentality between ourselves and the
truth; for outer knowledge can be picked up by the way, by ordinary attention and reception, but the inner, hidden
and higher truth can only be seized by an absolute concentration of the mind on its object, an absolute
concentration of the will to attain it and, once attained, to hold it habitually and securely unite oneself with it. For
identification is the condition of complete knowledge and possession; it is the intense result of a habitual purified
reflecting of the reality and an entire concentration on it; and it is necessary in order to break down entirely that
division and separation of ourselves from the divine being and the eternal reality which is the normal condition of
our unregenerated ignorant mentality.
Page 515

\par None of these things can be done by the methods of the lower knowledge. It is true that here also they have
a preparing action, but up to a certain point and to a certain degree of intensity only, and it is where their action
ceases that the action of Yoga takes up our growth into the Divine and finds the means to complete it. All pursuit
of knowledge, if not vitiated by a too earthward tendency, tends to refine, to subtilise, to purify the being. In
proportion as we become more mental, we attain to a subtler action of our whole nature which becomes more
apt to reflect and receive higher thoughts, a purer will, a less physical truth, more inward influences. The power
of ethical knowledge and the ethical habit of thought and will to purify is obvious. Philosophy not only purifies the
reason and predisposes it to the contact of the universal and the infinite, but tends to stabilise the nature and
create the tranquillity of the sage; and tranquillity is a sign of increasing self-mastery and purity. The
preoccupation with universal beauty even in its aesthetic forms has an intense power for refining and subtilising
the nature, and at its highest it is a great force for purification. Even the scientific habit of mind and the
disinterested preoccupation with cosmic law and truth not only refine the reasoning and observing faculty, but
have, when not counteracted by other tendencies, a steadying, elevating and purifying influence on the mind and
moral nature which has not been sufficiently noticed.
\par The concentration of the mind and the training of the will towards the reception of the truth and living in the
truth is also an evident result, a perpetual necessity of these pursuits; and at the end or in their highest intensities
they may and do lead first to an intellectual, then to a reflective perception of the divine Reality which may
culminate in a sort of preliminary identification with it. But all this cannot go beyond a certain point. The
systematic purification of the whole being for an integral reflection and taking in of the divine reality can only be
done by the special methods of Yoga. Its absolute concentration has to take the place of the dispersed
concentrations of the lower knowledge; the vague and ineffective identification which is all the lower knowledge
can bring, has to be replaced by
Page 516

the complete, intimate, imperative and living union which Yoga brings.
\par Nevertheless, Yoga does not either in its path or in its attainment exclude and throw away the forms of the
lower knowledge, except when it takes the shape of an extreme asceticism or a mysticism altogether intolerant
of this other divine mystery of the world-existence. It separates itself from them by the intensity, largeness and
height of its objective and the specialisation of its methods to suit its aim; but it not only starts from them, but for
a certain part of the way carries them with it and uses them as auxiliaries. Thus it is evident how largely ethical
thought and practice,—not so much external as internal conduct,—enter into the preparatory method of Yoga,
into its aim at purity. Again the whole method of Yoga is psychological; it might almost be termed the
consummate practice of a perfect psychological knowledge. The data of philosophy are the supports from which
it begins in the realisation of God through the principles of his being; only it carries the intelligent understanding
which is all philosophy gives, into an intensity which carries it beyond thought into vision and beyond
understanding into realisation and possession; what philosophy leaves abstract and remote, it brings into a living
nearness and spiritual concreteness. The aesthetic and emotional mind and aesthetic forms are used by Yoga as
a support for concentration even in the Yoga of knowledge and are, sublimated, the whole means of the Yoga of
love and delight, as life and action, sublimated, are the whole means of the Yoga of works. Contemplation of God
in Nature, contemplation and service of God in man and in the life of man and of the world in its past, present
and future, are equally elements of which the Yoga of knowledge can make use to complete the realisation of
God in all things. Only, all is directed to the one aim, directed towards God, filled with the idea of the divine,
infinite, universal existence so that the outward-going, sensuous, pragmatical preoccupation of the lower
knowledge with phenomena and forms is replaced by the one divine preoccupation. After attainment the same
character remains. The Yogin continues to know and see God in the finite
Page 517

and be a channel of God-consciousness and God-action in the world; therefore the knowledge of the world and
the enlarging and uplifting of all that appertains to life comes within his scope. Only, in all he sees God, sees the
supreme reality, and his motive of work is to help mankind towards the knowledge of God and the possession of
the supreme reality. He sees God through the data of science, God through the conclusions of philosophy, God
through the forms of Beauty and the forms of Good, God in all the activities of life, God in the past of the world
and its effects, in the present and its tendencies, in the future and its great progression. Into any or all of these he
can bring his illumined vision and his liberated power of the spirit. The lower knowledge has been the step from
which he has risen to the higher; the higher illumines for him the lower and makes it part of itself, even if only its
lower fringe and most external radiation.
Page 518

\par
\hn Chapter XXVI
\par
\ht Samadhi
\par\drop Intimately connected with the aim of the Yoga of Knowledge which must always be the growth, the
ascent or the withdrawal into a higher or a divine consciousness not now normal to us, is the importance attached
to the phenomenon of Yogic trance, to Samadhi. It is supposed that there are states of being which can only be
gained in trance; that especially is to be desired in which all action of awareness is abolished and there is no
consciousness at all except the pure supramental immersion in immobile, timeless and infinite being. By passing
away in this trance the soul departs into the silence of the highest Nirvana without possibility of return into any
illusory or inferior state of existence. Samadhi is not so all-important in the Yoga of devotion, but it still has its
place there as the swoon of being into which the ecstasy of divine love casts the soul. To enter into it is the
supreme step of the ladder of Yogic practice in Rajayoga and Hathayoga. What then is the nature of Samadhi or
the utility of its trance in an integral Yoga? It is evident that where our objective includes the possession of the
Divine in life, a state of cessation of life cannot be the last consummating step or the highest desirable condition:
Yogic trance cannot be an aim, as in so many Yogic systems, but only a means, and a means not of escape from
the waking existence, but to enlarge and raise the whole seeing, living and active consciousness.
\par The importance of Samadhi rests upon the truth which modern knowledge is rediscovering, but which has
never been lost in Indian psychology, that only a small part whether of world-being or of our own being comes
into our ken or into our action. The rest is hidden behind in subliminal reaches of being which descend into the
profoundest depths of the subconscient and rise to highest peaks of superconscience, or which surround the little
field of our waking self with a wide circumconscient existence
Page 519

of which our mind and sense catch only a few indications. The old Indian psychology expressed this fact by
dividing consciousness into three provinces, waking state, dream-state, sleep-state, \s{j\=agrat}, \s{svapna},
\s{su\,supti}; and it supposed in the human being a waking self, a dream-self, a sleep-self, with the supreme or
absolute self of being, the fourth or Turiya, beyond, of which all these are derivations for the enjoyment of
relative experience in the world.
\par If we examine the phraseology of the old books, we shall find that the waking state is the consciousness of
the material universe which we normally possess in this embodied existence dominated by the physical mind. The
dream-state is a consciousness corresponding to the subtler life-plane and mind-plane behind, which to us, even
when we get intimations of them, have not the same concrete reality as the things of the physical existence. The
sleep-state is a consciousness corresponding to the supramental plane proper to the gnosis, which is beyond our
experience because our causal body or envelope of gnosis is not developed in us, its faculties not active, and
therefore we are in relation to that plane in a condition of dreamless sleep. The Turiya beyond is the
consciousness of our pure self-existence or our absolute being with which we have no direct relations at all,
whatever mental reflections we may receive in our dream or our waking or even, irrecoverably, in our sleep
consciousness. This fourfold scale corresponds to the degrees of the ladder of being by which we climb back
towards the absolute Divine. Normally therefore we cannot get back from the physical mind to the higher planes
or degrees of consciousness without receding from the waking state, without going in and away from it and
losing touch with the material world. Hence to those who desire to have the experience of these higher degrees,
trance becomes a desirable thing, a means of escape from the limitations of the physical mind and nature.
\par Samadhi or Yogic trance retires to increasing depths according as it draws farther and farther away from
the normal or waking state and enters into degrees of consciousness less and less communicable to the waking
mind, less and less ready to
Page 520

receive a summons from the waking world. Beyond a certain point the trance becomes complete and it is then
almost or quite impossible to awaken or call back the soul that has receded into them; it can only come back by
its own will or at most by a violent shock of physical appeal dangerous to the system owing to the abrupt
upheaval of return. There are said to be supreme states of trance in which the soul persisting for too long a time
cannot return; for it loses its hold on the cord which binds it to the consciousness of life, and the body is left,
maintained indeed in its set position, not dead by dissolution, but incapable of recovering the ensouled life which
had inhabited it. Finally, the Yogin acquires at a certain stage of development the power of abandoning his body
definitively without the ordinary phenomena of death, by an act of will,
\note{\s{icch\=a-m\,rtyu}.} or by a process of withdrawing the pranic life-force through the gate of the upward
life-current (\s{ud\=ana}), opening for it a way through the mystic \s{brahmarandhra} in the head. By departure
from life in the state of Samadhi he attains directly to that higher status of being to which he aspires.
\par In the dream-state itself there are an infinite series of depths; from the lighter recall is easy and the world of
the physical senses is at the doors, though for the moment shut out; in the deeper it becomes remote and less
able to break in upon the inner absorption, the mind has entered into secure depths of trance. There is a complete
difference between Samadhi and normal sleep, between the dream-state of Yoga and the physical state of
dream. The latter belongs to the physical mind; in the former the mind proper and subtle is at work liberated from
the immixture of the physical mentality. The dreams of the physical mind are an incoherent jumble made up
partly of responses to vague touches from the physical world round which the lower mind-faculties disconnected
from the will and reason, the \s{buddhi}, weave a web of wandering phantasy, partly of disordered associations
from the brain-memory, partly of reflections from the soul travelling on the mental plane, reflections which are,
ordinarily, received
Page 521

without intelligence or coordination, wildly distorted in the reception and mixed up confusedly with the other
dream elements, with brain-memories and fantastic responses to any sensory touch from the physical world. In
the Yogic dream-state, on the other hand, the mind is in clear possession of itself, though not of the physical
world, works coherently and is able to use either its ordinary will and intelligence with a concentrated power or
else the higher will and intelligence of the more exalted planes of mind. It withdraws from experience of the
outer world, it puts its seals upon the physical senses and their doors of communication with material things; but
everything that is proper to itself, thought, reasoning, reflection, vision, it can continue to execute with an
increased purity and power of sovereign concentration free from the distractions and unsteadiness of the waking
mind. It can use too its will and produce upon itself or upon its environment mental, moral and even physical
effects which may continue and have their after consequences on the waking state subsequent to the cessation
of the trance.
\par To arrive at full possession of the powers of the dream-state, it is necessary first to exclude the attack of the
sights, sounds etc. of the outer world upon the physical organs. It is quite possible indeed to be aware in the
dream-trance of the outer physical world through the subtle senses which belong to the subtle body; one may be
aware of them just so far as one chooses and on a much wider scale than in the waking condition: for the subtle
senses have a far more powerful range than the gross physical organs, a range which may be made practically
unlimited. But this awareness of the physical world through the subtle senses is something quite different from
our normal awareness of it through the physical organs; the latter is incompatible with the settled state of trance,
for the pressure of the physical senses breaks the Samadhi and calls back the mind to live in their normal field
where alone they have power. But the subtle senses have power both upon their own planes and upon the
physical world, though this is to them more remote than their own world of being. In Yoga various devices are
used to seal up the doors of the physical sense, some of them physical devices; but the one
Page 522

all-sufficient means is a force of concentration by which the mind is drawn inward to depths where the call of
physical things can no longer easily attain to it. A second necessity is to get rid of the intervention of physical
sleep. The ordinary habit of the mind when it goes in away from contact with physical things is to fall into the
torpor of sleep or its dreams, and therefore when called in for the purposes of Samadhi, it gives or tends to give,
at the first chance, by sheer force of habit, not the response demanded, but its usual response of physical
slumber. This habit of the mind has to be got rid of; the mind has to learn to be awake in the dream-state, in
possession of itself, not with the outgoing, but with an ingathered wakefulness in which, though immersed in itself,
it exercises all its powers.
\par The experiences of the dream-state are infinitely various. For not only has it sovereign possession of the
usual mental powers, reasoning, discrimination, will, imagination, and can use them in whatever way, on whatever
subject, for whatever purpose it pleases, but it is able to establish connection with all the worlds to which it has
natural access or to which it chooses to acquire access, from the physical to the higher mental worlds. This it
does by various means open to the subtlety, flexibility and comprehensive movement of this internalised mind
liberated from the narrow limitations of the physical outward-going senses. It is able first to take cognizance of
all things whether in the material world or upon other planes by aid of perceptible images, not only images of
things visible, but of sounds, touch, smell, taste, movement, action, of all that makes itself sensible to the mind and
its organs. For the mind in Samadhi has access to the inner space called sometimes the \s{cid\=ak\=a\'sa}, to depths
of more and more subtle ether which are heavily curtained from the physical sense by the grosser ether of the
material universe, and all things sensible, whether in the material world or any other, create reconstituting
vibrations, sensible echoes, reproductions, recurrent images of themselves which that subtler ether receives and
retains.
\par It is this which explains many of the phenomena of clairvoyance, clairaudience, etc.; for these phenomena
are only the exceptional admission of the waking mentality into a limited
Page 523

sensitiveness to what might be called the image memory of the subtle ether, by which not only the signs of all
things past and present, but even those of things future can be seized; for things future are already accomplished
to knowledge and vision on higher planes of mind and their images can be reflected upon mind in the present. But
these things which are exceptional to the waking mentality, difficult and to be perceived only by the possession of
a special power or else after assiduous training, are natural to the dream-state of trance consciousness in which
the subliminal mind is free. And that mind can also take cognizance of things on various planes not only by these
sensible images, but by a species of thought perception or of thought reception and impression analogous to that
phenomenon of consciousness which in modern psychical science has been given the name of telepathy. But the
powers of the dream-state do not end here. It can by a sort of projection of ourselves, in a subtle form of the
mental body, actually enter into other planes and worlds or into distant places and scenes of this world, move
among them with a sort of bodily presence and bring back the direct experience of their scenes and truths and
occurrences. It may even project actually the mental or vital body for the same purpose and travel in it, leaving
the physical body in a profoundest trance without sign of life until its return.
\par The greatest value of the dream-state of Samadhi lies, however, not in these more outward things, but in its
power to open up easily higher ranges and powers of thought, emotion, will by which the soul grows in height,
range and self-mastery. Especially, withdrawing from the distraction of sensible things, it can, in a perfect power
of concentrated self-seclusion, prepare itself by a free reasoning, thought, discrimination, or more intimately,
more finally, by an ever deeper vision and identification, for access to the Divine, the supreme Self, the
transcendent Truth, both in its principles and powers and manifestations and in its highest original Being. Or it
can by an absorbed inner joy and emotion, as in a sealed and secluded chamber of the soul, prepare itself for the
delight of union with the divine Beloved, the Master of all bliss, rapture and Ananda.
Page 524

\par For the integral Yoga this method of Samadhi may seem to have the disadvantage that when it ceases, the
thread is broken and the soul returns into the distraction and imperfection of the outward life, with only such an
elevating effect upon that outer life as the general memory of these deeper experiences may produce. But this
gulf, this break is not inevitable. In the first place, it is only in the untrained psychic being that the experiences of
the trance are a blank to the waking mind; as it becomes the master of its Samadhi, it is able to pass without any
gulf of oblivion from the inner to the outer waking. Secondly, when this has been once done, what is attained in
the inner state, becomes easier to acquire by the waking consciousness and to turn into the normal experience,
powers, mental status of the waking life. The subtle mind which is normally eclipsed by the insistence of the
physical being, becomes powerful even in the waking state, until even there the enlarging man is able to live in his
several subtle bodies as well as in his physical body, to be aware of them and in them, to use their senses,
faculties, powers, to dwell in possession of supraphysical truth, consciousness and experience.
\par The sleep-state ascends to a higher power of being, beyond thought into pure consciousness, beyond
emotion into pure bliss, beyond will into pure mastery; it is the gate of union with the supreme state of
Sachchidananda out of which all the activities of the world are born. But here we must take care to avoid the
pitfalls of symbolic language. The use of the words dream and sleep for these higher states is nothing but an
image drawn from the experience of the normal physical mind with regard to planes in which it is not at home. It
is not the truth that the Self in the third status called perfect sleep, \s{su\,supti}, is in a state of slumber. The sleep
self is on the contrary described as Prajna, the Master of Wisdom and Knowledge, Self of the Gnosis, and as
Ishwara, the Lord of being. To the physical mind a sleep, it is to our wider and subtler consciousness a greater
waking. To the normal mind all that exceeds its normal experience but still comes into its scope, seems a dream;
but at the point where it borders on things quite beyond its scope, it can no longer see truth even as
Page 525

in a dream, but passes into the blank incomprehension and non-reception of slumber. This border-line varies with
the power of the individual consciousness, with the degree and height of its enlightenment and awakening. The
line may be pushed up higher and higher until it may pass even beyond the mind. Normally indeed the human
mind cannot be awake, even with the inner waking of trance, on the supramental levels; but this disability can be
overcome. Awake on these levels the soul becomes master of the ranges of gnostic thought, gnostic will, gnostic
delight, and if it can do this in Samadhi, it may carry its memory of experience and its power of experience over
into the waking state. Even on the yet higher level open to us, that of the Ananda, the awakened soul may
become similarly possessed of the Bliss-Self both in its concentration and in its cosmic comprehension. But still
there may be ranges above from which it can bring back no memory except that which says, “somehow,
indescribably, I was in bliss,” the bliss of an unconditioned existence beyond all potentiality of expression by
thought or description by image or feature. Even the sense of being may disappear in an experience in which the
word existence loses its sense and the Buddhistic symbol of Nirvana seems alone and sovereignly justified.
However high the power of awakening goes, there seems to be a beyond in which the image of sleep, of
\s{su\,supti}, will still find its application.
\par Such is the principle of the Yogic trance, Samadhi,—into its complex phenomena we need not now enter. It
is sufficient to note its double utility in the integral Yoga. It is true that up to a point difficult to define or delimit
almost all that Samadhi can give, can be acquired without recourse to Samadhi. But still there are certain heights
of spiritual and psychic experience of which the direct as opposed to a reflecting experience can only be
acquired deeply and in its fullness by means of the Yogic trance. And even for that which can be otherwise
acquired, it offers a ready means, a facility which becomes more helpful, if not indispensable, the higher and
more difficult of access become the planes on which the heightened spiritual experience is sought. Once attained
there, it has to be brought as much as possible into the waking consciousness. For in a Yoga which embraces
Page 526

all life completely and without reserve, the full use of Samadhi comes only when its gains can be made the
normal possession and experience for an integral waking of the embodied soul in the human being.
Page 527

\par
\hn Chapter XXVII
\par
\ht Hathayoga
\par\drop There are almost as many ways of arriving at Samadhi as there are different paths of Yoga. Indeed so
great is the importance attached to it, not only as a supreme means of arriving at the highest consciousness, but
as the very condition and status of that highest consciousness itself, in which alone it can be completely
possessed and enjoyed while we are in the body, that certain disciplines of Yoga look as if they were only ways
of arriving at Samadhi. All Yoga is in its nature an attempt and an arriving at unity with the Supreme,—unity with
the being of the Supreme, unity with the consciousness of the Supreme, unity with the bliss of the Supreme,—or,
if we repudiate the idea of absolute unity, at least at some kind of union, even if it be only for the soul to live in
one status and periphery of being with the Divine, \s{s\=alokya}, or in a sort of indivisible proximity, \s{s\=am\=ipya}.
This can only be gained by rising to a higher level and intensity of consciousness than our ordinary mentality
possesses. Samadhi, as we have seen, offers itself as the natural status of such a higher level and greater
intensity. It assumes naturally a great importance in the Yoga of knowledge, because there it is the very principle
of its method and its object to raise the mental consciousness into a clarity and concentrated power by which it
can become entirely aware of, lost in, identified with true being. But there are two great disciplines in which it
becomes of an even greater importance. To these two systems, to Rajayoga and Hathayoga, we may as well
now turn; for in spite of the wide difference of their methods from that of the path of knowledge, they have this
same principle as their final justification. At the same time, it will not be necessary for us to do more than regard
the spirit of their gradations in passing; for in a synthetic and integral Yoga they take a secondary importance;
their aims have indeed to be included, but their methods can either altogether
Page 528

be dispensed with or used only for a preliminary or else a casual assistance.
\par Hathayoga is a powerful, but difficult and onerous system whose whole principle of action is founded on an
intimate connection between the body and the soul. The body is the key, the body the secret both of bondage and
of release, of animal weakness and of divine power, of the obscuration of the mind and soul and of their
illumination, of subjection to pain and limitation and of self-mastery, of death and of immortality. The body is not
to the Hathayogin a mere mass of living matter, but a mystic bridge between the spiritual and the physical being;
one has even seen an ingenious exegete of the Hathayogic discipline explain the Vedantic symbol OM as a
figure of this mystic human body. Although, however, he speaks always of the physical body and makes that the
basis of his practices, he does not view it with the eye of the anatomist or physiologist, but describes and explains
it in language which always looks back to the subtle body behind the physical system. In fact the whole aim of
the Hathayogin may be summarised from our point of view, though he would not himself put it in that language,
as an attempt by fixed scientific processes to give to the soul in the physical body the power, the light, the purity,
the freedom, the ascending scales of spiritual experience which would naturally be open to it, if it dwelt here in
the subtle and the developed causal vehicle.
\par To speak of the processes of Hathayoga as scientific may seem strange to those who associate the idea of
science only with the superficial phenomena of the physical universe apart from all that is behind them; but they
are equally based on definite experience of laws and their workings and give, when rightly practised, their
well-tested results. In fact, Hathayoga is, in its own way, a system of knowledge; but while the proper Yoga of
knowledge is a philosophy of being put into spiritual practice, a psychological system, this is a science of being, a
psycho-physical system. Both produce physical, psychic and spiritual results; but because they stand at different
poles of the same truth, to one the psycho-physical results are of small importance, the pure psychic and spiritual
alone matter, and even the pure psychic are only
Page 529

accessories of the spiritual which absorb all the attention; in the other the physical is of immense importance, the
psychical a considerable fruit, the spiritual the highest and consummating result, but it seems for a long time a
thing postponed and remote, so great and absorbing is the attention which the body demands. It must not be
forgotten, however, that both do arrive at the same end. Hathayoga, also, is a path, though by a long, difficult and
meticulous movement, \s{du\,hkham \=aptum}, to the Supreme.
\par All Yoga proceeds in its method by three principles of practice; first, purification, that is to say, the removal
of all aberrations, disorders, obstructions brought about by the mixed and irregular action of the energy of being in
our physical, moral and mental system; secondly, concentration, that is to say, the bringing to its full intensity and
the mastered and self-directed employment of that energy of being in us for a definite end; thirdly, liberation, that
is to say, the release of our being from the narrow and painful knots of the individualised energy in a false and
limited play, which at present are the law of our nature. The enjoyment of our liberated being which brings us
into unity or union with the Supreme, is the consummation; it is that for which Yoga is done. Three indispensable
steps and the high, open and infinite levels to which they mount; and in all its practice Hathayoga keeps these in
view.
\par The two main members of its physical discipline, to which the others are mere accessories, are \s{\=asana},
the habituating of the body to certain attitudes of immobility, and \s{pr\=a\,n\=ay\=ama}, the regulated direction and
arrestation by exercises of breathing of the vital currents of energy in the body. The physical being is the
instrument; but the physical being is made up of two elements, the physical and the vital, the body which is the
apparent instrument and the basis, and the life energy, \s{pr\=a\,na}, which is the power and the real instrument.
Both of these instruments are now our masters. We are subject to the body, we are subject to the life energy; it
is only in a very limited degree that we can, though souls, though mental beings, at all pose as their masters. We
are bound by a poor and limited physical nature, we are bound consequently by a poor and limited life-power
which is all that
Page 530

the body can bear or to which it can give scope. Moreover, the action of each and both in us is subject not only
to the narrowest limitations, but to a constant impurity, which renews itself every time it is rectified, and to all
sorts of disorders, some of which are normal, a violent order, part of our ordinary physical life, others abnormal,
its maladies and disturbances. With all this Hathayoga has to deal; all this it has to overcome; and it does it
mainly by these two methods, complex and cumbrous in action, but simple in principle and effective.
\par The Hathayogic system of Asana has at its basis two profound ideas which bring with them many effective
implications. The first is that of control by physical immobility, the second is that of power by immobility. The
power of physical immobility is as important in Hathayoga as the power of mental immobility in the Yoga of
knowledge, and for parallel reasons. To the mind unaccustomed to the deeper truths of our being and nature they
would both seem to be a seeking after the listless passivity of inertia. The direct contrary is the truth; for Yogic
passivity, whether of mind or body, is a condition of the greatest increase, possession and continence of energy.
The normal activity of our minds is for the most part a disordered restlessness, full of waste and rapidly tentative
expenditure of energy in which only a little is selected for the workings of the self-mastering will,—waste, be it
understood, from this point of view, not that of universal Nature in which what is to us waste, serves the
purposes of her economy. The activity of our bodies is a similar restlessness.
\par It is the sign of a constant inability of the body to hold even the limited life energy that enters into or is
generated in it, and consequently of a general dissipation of this Pranic force with a quite subordinate element of
ordered and well-economised activity. Moreover in the consequent interchange and balancing between the
movement and interaction of the vital energies normally at work in the body and their interchange with those
which act upon it from outside, whether the energies of others or of the general Pranic force variously active in
the environment, there is a constant precarious balancing and adjustment which may at any moment go wrong.
Every obstruction, every defect, \NH every
Page 531

excess, every lesion creates impurities and disorders. \NH Nature manages it all well enough for her own
purposes, when left to herself; but the moment the blundering mind and will of the human being interfere with her
habits and her vital instincts and intuitions, especially when they create false or artificial habits, a still more
precarious order and frequent derangement become the rule of the being. Yet this interference is inevitable,
since man lives not for the purposes of the vital Nature in him alone, but for higher purposes which she had not
contemplated in her first balance and to which she has with difficulty to adjust her operations. Therefore the first
necessity of a greater status or action is to get rid of this disordered restlessness, to still the activity and to
regulate it. The Hathayogin has to bring about an abnormal poise of status and action of the body and the life
energy, abnormal not in the direction of greater disorder, but of superiority and self-mastery.
\par The first object of the immobility of the Asana is to get rid of the restlessness imposed on the body and to
force it to hold the Pranic energy instead of dissipating and squandering it. The experience in the practice of
Asana is not that of a cessation and diminution of energy by inertia, but of a great increase, inpouring, circulation
of force. The body, accustomed to work off superfluous energy by movement, is at first ill able to bear this
increase and this retained inner action and betrays it by violent tremblings; afterwards it habituates itself and,
when the Asana is conquered, then it finds as much ease in the posture, however originally difficult or unusual to
it, as in its easiest attitudes sedentary or recumbent. It becomes increasingly capable of holding whatever amount
of increased vital energy is brought to bear upon it without needing to spill it out in movement, and this increase is
so enormous as to seem illimitable, so that the body of the perfected Hathayogin is capable of feats of
endurance, force, unfatigued expenditure of energy of which the normal physical powers of man at their highest
would be incapable. For it is not only able to hold and retain this energy, but to bear its possession of the physical
system and its more complete movement through it. The life energy, thus occupying
Page 532

and operating in a powerful, unified movement on the tranquil and passive body, freed from the restless balancing
between the continent power and the contained, becomes a much greater and more effective force. In fact, it
seems then rather to contain and possess and use the body than to be contained, possessed and used by it,—just
as the restless active mind seems to seize on and use irregularly and imperfectly whatever spiritual force comes
into it, but the tranquillised mind is held, possessed and used by the spiritual force.
\par The body, thus liberated from itself, purified from many of its disorders and irregularities, becomes, partly by
Asana, completely by combined Asana and Pranayama, a perfected instrument. It is freed from its ready liability
to fatigue; it acquires an immense power of health; its tendencies of decay, age and death are arrested. The
Hathayogin even at an age advanced beyond the ordinary span maintains the unimpaired vigour, health and youth
of the life in the body; even the appearance of physical youth is sustained for a longer time. He has a much
greater power of longevity, and from his point of view, the body being the instrument, it is a matter of no small
importance to preserve it long and to keep it for all that time free from impairing deficiencies. It is to be
observed, also, that there are an enormous variety of Asanas in Hathayoga, running in their fullness beyond the
number of eighty, some of them of the most complicated and difficult character. This variety serves partly to
increase the results already noted, as well as to give a greater freedom and flexibility to the use of the body, but it
serves also to alter the relation of the physical energy in the body to the earth energy with which it is related. The
lightening of the heavy hold of the latter, of which the overcoming of fatigue is the first sign and the phenomenon
of \s{utth\=apana} or partial levitation the last, is one result. The gross body begins to acquire something of the
nature of the subtle body and to possess something of its relations with the life-energy; that becomes a greater
force more powerfully felt and yet capable of a lighter and freer and more resolvable physical action, powers
which culminate in the Hathayogic \sforced{siddhis} or extraordinary powers of \s{garim\=a}, \s{mahim\=a},
\s{a\,nim\=a} and \s{laghim\=a}.
Page 533

Moreover, the life ceases to be entirely dependent on the action of the physical organs and functionings, such as
the heart-beats and the breathing. These can in the end be suspended without cessation of or lesion to the life.
\par All this, however, the result in its perfection of Asana and Pranayama, is only a basic physical power and
freedom. The higher use of Hathayoga depends more intimately on Pranayama. Asana deals more directly with
the more material part of the physical totality, though here too it needs the aid of the other; Pranayama, starting
from the physical immobility and self-holding which is secured by Asana, deals more directly with the subtler vital
parts, the nervous system. This is done by various regulations of the breathing, starting from equality of
respiration and inspiration and extending to the most diverse rhythmic regulations of both with an interval of
inholding of the breath. In the end the keeping in of the breath, which has first to be done with some effort, and
even its cessation become as easy and seem as natural as the constant taking in and throwing out which is its
normal action. But the first objects of the Pranayama are to purify the nervous system, to circulate the
life-energy through all the nerves without obstruction, disorder or irregularity, and to acquire a complete control
of its functionings, so that the mind and will of the soul inhabiting the body may be no longer subject to the body
or life or their combined limitations. The power of these exercises of breathing to bring about a purified and
unobstructed state of the nervous system is a known and well-established fact of our physiology. It helps also to
clear the physical system, but is not entirely effective at first on all its canals and openings; therefore the
Hathayogin uses supplementary physical methods for clearing them out regularly of all their accumulations. The
combination of these with Asana,—particular Asanas have even an effect in destroying particular
diseases,—and with Pranayama maintains perfectly the health of the body. But the principal gain is that by this
purification the vital energy can be directed anywhere, to any part of the body and in any way or with any
rhythm of its movement.
\par The mere function of breathing into and out of the lungs is
Page 534

only the most sensible, outward and seizable movement of the Prana, the Breath of Life in our physical system.
The Prana has according to Yogic science a fivefold movement pervading all the nervous system and the whole
material body and determining all its functionings. The Hathayogin seizes on the outward movement of
respiration as a sort of key which opens to him the control of all these five powers of the Prana. He becomes
sensibly aware of their inner operations, mentally conscious of his whole physical life and action. He is able to
direct the Prana through all the \sforced{n\=a\,d\=is} or nerve-channels of his system. He becomes aware of its action
in the six \sforced{cakras} or ganglionic centres of the nervous system, and is able to open it up in each beyond
its present limited, habitual and mechanical workings. He gets, in short, a perfect control of the life in the body in
its most subtle nervous as well as in its grossest physical aspects, even over that in it which is at present
involuntary and out of the reach of our observing consciousness and will. Thus a complete mastery of the body
and the life and a free and effective use of them established upon a purification of their workings is founded as a
basis for the higher aims of Hathayoga.
\par All this, however, is still a mere basis, the outward and inward physical conditions of the two instruments
used by Hathayoga. There still remains the more important matter of the psychical and spiritual effects to which
they can be turned. This depends on the connection between the body and the mind and spirit and between the
gross and the subtle body on which the system of Hathayoga takes its stand. Here it comes into line with
Rajayoga, and a point is reached at which a transition from the one to the other can be made.
Page 535

\par
\hn Chapter XXVIII
\par
\ht Rajayoga
\par\drop As the body and the Prana are the key of all the closed doors of the Yoga for the Hathayogin, so is the
mind the key in Rajayoga. But since in both the dependence of the mind on the body and the Prana is admitted, in
the Hathayoga totally, in the established system of Rajayoga partially, therefore in both systems the practice of
Asana and Pranayama is included; but in the one they occupy the whole field, in the other each is limited only to
one simple process and in their unison they are intended to serve only a limited and intermediate office. We can
easily see how largely man, even though in his being an embodied soul, is in his earthly nature the physical and
vital being and how, at first sight at least, his mental activities seem to depend almost entirely on his body and his
nervous system. Modern Science and psychology have even held, for a time, this dependence to be in fact an
identity; they have tried to establish that there is no such separate entity as mind or soul and that all mental
operations are in reality physical functionings. Even otherwise, apart from this untenable hypothesis, the
dependence is so exaggerated that it has been supposed to be an altogether binding condition, and any such thing
as the control of the vital and bodily functionings by the mind or its power to detach itself from them has long
been treated as an error, a morbid state of the mind or a hallucination. Therefore the dependence has remained
absolute, and Science neither finds nor seeks for the real key of the dependence and therefore can discover for
us no secret of release and mastery.
\par The psycho-physical science of Yoga does not make this mistake. It seeks for the key, finds it and is able to
effect the release; for it takes account of the psychical or mental body behind of which the physical is a sort of
reproduction in gross form, and is able to discover thereby secrets of the physical body
Page 536

which do not appear to a purely physical enquiry. This mental or psychical body, which the soul keeps even after
death, has also a subtle pranic force in it corresponding to its own subtle nature and substance,—for wherever
there is life of any kind, there must be the pranic energy and a substance in which it can work,—and this force is
directed through a system of numerous channels, called \s{n\=a\,d\=i},—the subtle nervous organisation of the psychic
body,—which are gathered up into six (or really seven) centres called technically lotuses or circles, \s{cakra},
and which rise in an ascending scale to the summit where there is the thousand-petalled lotus from which all the
mental and vital energy flows. Each of these lotuses is the centre and the storing-house of its own particular
system of psychological powers, energies and operations,—each system corresponding to a plane of our
psychological existence,—and these flow out and return in the stream of the pranic energies as they course
through the \sforced{n\=a\,d\=is}.
\par This arrangement of the psychic body is reproduced in the physical with the spinal column as a rod and the
ganglionic centres as the chakras which rise up from the bottom of the column, where the lowest is attached, to
the brain and find their summit in the \s{brahmarandhra} at the top of the skull. These chakras or lotuses,
however, are in physical man closed or only partly open, with the consequence that only such powers and only so
much of them are active in him as are sufficient for his ordinary physical life, and so much mind and soul only is
at play as will accord with its need. This is the real reason, looked at from the mechanical point of view, why the
embodied soul seems so dependent on the bodily and nervous life,—though the dependence is neither so
complete nor so real as it seems. The whole energy of the soul is not at play in the physical body and life, the
secret powers of mind are not awake in it, the bodily and nervous energies predominate. But all the while the
supreme energy is there, asleep; it is said to be coiled up and slumbering like a snake,—therefore it is called the
\s{ku\,n\,dalin\=i \'sakti},—in the lowest of the chakras, in the \sforced{m\=ul\=adh\=ara}. When by Pranayama the division
between the upper and lower prana currents in the body is dissolved, this Kundalini is struck and
Page 537

awakened, it uncoils itself and begins to rise upward like a fiery serpent breaking open each lotus as it ascends
until the Shakti meets the Purusha in the \sforced{brahmarandhra} in a deep samadhi of union.
\par Put less symbolically, in more philosophical though perhaps less profound language, this means that the real
energy of our being is lying asleep and inconscient in the depths of our vital system, and is awakened by the
practice of Pranayama. In its expansion it opens up all the centres of our psychological being in which reside the
powers and the consciousness of what would now be called perhaps our subliminal self; therefore as each centre
of power and consciousness is opened up, we get access to successive psychological planes and are able to put
ourselves in communication with the worlds or cosmic states of being which correspond to them; all the psychic
powers abnormal to physical man, but natural to the soul develop in us. Finally, at the summit of the ascension,
this arising and expanding energy meets with the superconscient self which sits concealed behind and above our
physical and mental existence; this meeting leads to a profound samadhi of union in which our waking
consciousness loses itself in the superconscient. Thus by the thorough and unremitting practice of Pranayama the
Hathayogin attains in his own way the psychic and spiritual results which are pursued through more directly
psychical and spiritual methods in other Yogas. The one mental aid which he conjoins with it, is the use of the
mantra, sacred syllable, name or mystic formula which is of so much importance in the Indian systems of Yoga
and common to them all. This secret of the power of the mantra, the six chakras and the Kundalini Shakti is one
of the central truths of all that complex psycho-physical science and practice of which the Tantric philosophy
claims to give us a rationale and the most complete compendium of methods. All religions and disciplines in India
which use largely the psycho-physical method, depend more or less upon it for their practices.
\par Rajayoga also uses the Pranayama and for the same principal psychic purposes as the Hathayoga, but being
in its whole principle a psychical system, it employs it only as one stage
Page 538

in the series of its practices and to a very limited extent, for three or four large utilities. It does not start with
Asana and Pranayama, but insists first on a moral purification of the mentality. This preliminary is of supreme
importance; without it the course of the rest of the Rajayoga is likely to be troubled, marred and full of
unexpected mental, moral and physical perils.
\note{In modern India people attracted to Yoga, but picking up its processes from books or from persons only
slightly acquainted with the matter, often plunge straight into Pranayama of Rajayoga, frequently with disastrous
results. Only the very strong in spirit can afford to make mistakes in this path.} This moral purification is divided
in the established system under two heads, five \sforced{yamas} and five \sforced{niyamas}. The first are rules
of moral self-control in conduct such as truth-speaking, abstinence from injury or killing, from theft etc.; but in
reality these must be regarded as merely certain main indications of the general need of moral self-control and
purity. \s{Yama} is, more largely, any self-discipline by which the rajasic egoism and its passions and desires in
the human being are conquered and quieted into perfect cessation. The object is to create a moral calm, a void of
the passions, and so prepare for the death of egoism in the rajasic human being. The \sforced{niyamas} are
equally a discipline of the mind by regular practices of which the highest is meditation on the divine Being, and
their object is to create a sattwic calm, purity and preparation for concentration upon which the secure pursuance
of the rest of the Yoga can be founded.
\par It is here, when this foundation has been secured, that the practice of Asana and Pranayama come in and
can then bear their perfect fruits. By itself the control of the mind and moral being only puts our normal
consciousness into the right preliminary condition; it cannot bring about that evolution or manifestation of the
higher psychic being which is necessary for the greater aims of Yoga. In order to bring about this manifestation
the present nodus of the vital and physical body with the mental being has to be loosened and the way made
clear for the ascent through the greater psychic being to the union with the superconscient Purusha. This can be
done by Pranayama.
Page 539

Asana is used by the Rajayoga only in its easiest and most natural position, that naturally taken by the body when
seated and gathered together, but with the back and head strictly erect and in a straight line, so that there may be
no deflection of the spinal cord. The object of the latter rule is obviously connected with the theory of the six
chakras and the circulation of the vital energy between the \s{m\=ul\=adh\=ara} and the \s{brahmarandhra}. The
Rajayogic Pranayama purifies and clears the nervous system; it enables us to circulate the vital energy equally
through the body and direct it also where we will according to need, and thus maintain a perfect health and
soundness of the body and the vital being; it gives us control of all the five habitual operations of the vital energy
in the system and at the same time breaks down the habitual divisions by which only the ordinary mechanical
processes of the vitality are possible to the normal life. It opens entirely the six centres of the psycho-physical
system and brings into the waking consciousness the power of the awakened Shakti and the light of the unveiled
Purusha on each of the ascending planes. Coupled with the use of the mantra it brings the divine energy into the
body and prepares for and facilitates that concentration in Samadhi which is the crown of the Rajayogic method.
\par Rajayogic concentration is divided into four stages; it commences with the drawing both of the mind and
senses from outward things, proceeds to the holding of the one object of concentration to the exclusion of all
other ideas and mental activities, then to the prolonged absorption of the mind in this object, finally, to the
complete ingoing of the consciousness by which it is lost to all outward mental activity in the oneness of Samadhi.
The real object of this mental discipline is to draw away the mind from the outward and the mental world into
union with the divine Being. Therefore in the first three stages use has to be made of some mental means or
support by which the mind, accustomed to run about from object to object, shall fix on one alone, and that one
must be something which represents the idea of the Divine. It is usually a name or a form or a mantra by which
the thought can be fixed in the sole knowledge or adoration of the Lord. By this concentration on the idea the
Page 540

mind enters from the idea into its reality, into which it sinks silent, absorbed, unified. This is the traditional
method. There are, however, others which are equally of a Rajayogic character, since they use the mental and
psychical being as key. Some of them are directed rather to the quiescence of the mind than to its immediate
absorption, as the discipline by which the mind is simply watched and allowed to exhaust its habit of vagrant
thought in a purposeless running from which it feels all sanction, purpose and interest withdrawn, and that, more
strenuous and rapidly effective, by which all outward-going thought is excluded and the mind forced to sink into
itself where in its absolute quietude it can only reflect the pure Being or pass away into its superconscient
existence. The method differs, the object and the result are the same.
\par Here, it might be supposed, the whole action and aim of Rajayoga must end. For its action is the stilling of
the waves of consciousness, its manifold activities, \s{cittav\,rtti}, first, through a habitual replacing of the turbid
rajasic activities by the quiet and luminous sattwic, then, by the stilling of all activities; and its object is to enter
into silent communion of soul and unity with the Divine. As a matter of fact we find that the system of Rajayoga
includes other objects,—such as the practice and use of occult powers,—some of which seem to be unconnected
with and even inconsistent with its main purpose. These powers or siddhis are indeed frequently condemned as
dangers and distractions which draw away the Yogin from his sole legitimate aim of divine union. On the way,
therefore, it would naturally seem as if they ought to be avoided; and once the goal is reached, it would seem that
they are then frivolous and superfluous. But Rajayoga is a psychic science and it includes the attainment of all
the higher states of consciousness and their powers by which the mental being rises towards the superconscient
as well as its ultimate and supreme possibility of union with the Highest. Moreover, the Yogin, while in the body,
is not always mentally inactive and sunk in Samadhi, and an account of the powers and states which are possible
to him on the higher planes of his being is necessary to the completeness of the science.
Page 541

\par These powers and experiences belong, first, to the vital and mental planes above this physical in which we
live, and are natural to the soul in the subtle body; as the dependence on the physical body decreases, these
abnormal activities become possible and even manifest themselves without being sought for. They can be
acquired and fixed by processes which the science gives, and their use then becomes subject to the will; or they
can be allowed to develop of themselves and used only when they come, or when the Divine within moves us to
use them; or else, even though thus naturally developing and acting, they may be rejected in a single-minded
devotion to the one supreme goal of the Yoga. Secondly, there are fuller, greater powers belonging to the
supramental planes which are the very powers of the Divine in his spiritual and supramentally ideative being.
These cannot be acquired at all securely or integrally by personal effort, but can only come from above, or else
can become natural to the man if and when he ascends beyond mind and lives in the spiritual being, power,
consciousness and ideation. They then become, not abnormal and laboriously acquired siddhis, but simply the
very nature and method of his action, if he still continues to be active in the world-existence.
\par On the whole, for an integral Yoga the special methods of Rajayoga and Hathayoga may be useful at times
in certain stages of the progress, but are not indispensable. It is true that their principal aims must be included in
the integrality of the Yoga; but they can be brought about by other means. For the methods of the integral Yoga
must be mainly spiritual, and dependence on physical methods or fixed psychic or psycho-physical processes on a
large scale would be the substitution of a lower for a higher action. We shall have occasion to touch upon this
question later when we come to the final principle of synthesis in method to which our examination of the
different Yogas is intended to lead.

\part
\par
Page 542

\hn Part III
\par
\ht The Yoga of Divine Love

\chapter
\par
Page 543

\hn Chapter I
\par
\ht Love and the Triple Path
\par\drop Will, knowledge and love are the three divine powers in human nature and the life of man, and they
point to the three paths by which the human soul rises to the divine. The integrality of them, the union of man
with God in all the three, must therefore, as we have seen, be the foundation of an integral Yoga.
\par Action is the first power of life. Nature begins with force and its works which, once conscious in man,
become will and its achievements; therefore it is that by turning his action Godwards the life of man best and
most surely begins to become divine. It is the door of first access, the starting-point of the initiation. When the
will in him is made one with the divine will and the whole action of the being proceeds from the Divine and is
directed towards the Divine, the union in works is perfectly accomplished. But works fulfil themselves in
knowledge; all the totality of works, says the Gita, finds its rounded culmination in knowledge, \s{sarva\.m
karm\=akhila\.m j\~n\=ane parisam\=apyate}. By union in will and works we become one in the omnipresent conscious
being from whom all our will and works have their rise and draw their power and in whom they fulfil the round of
their energies. And the crown of this union is love; for love is the delight of conscious union with the Being in
whom we live, act and move, by whom we exist, for whom alone we learn in the end to act and to be. That is the
trinity of our powers, the union of all three in God to which we arrive when we start from works as our way of
access and our line of contact.
\par Knowledge is the foundation of a constant living in the Divine. For consciousness is the foundation of all
living and being, and knowledge is the action of the consciousness, the light by which it knows itself and its
realities, the power by which, starting from action, we are able to hold the inner results
Page 545

of thought and act in a firm growth of our conscious being until it accomplishes itself, by union, in the infinity of
the divine being. The Divine meets us in many aspects and to each of them knowledge is the key, so that by
knowledge we enter into and possess the infinite and divine in every way of his being,
\s{sarvabh\=avena},
\note{Gita.} and receive him into us and are possessed by him in every way of ours.
\par Without knowledge we live blindly in him with the blindness of the power of Nature intent on its works, but
forgetful of its source and possessor, undivinely therefore, deprived of the real, the full delight of our being. By
knowledge arriving at conscious oneness with that which we know,—for by identity alone can complete and real
knowledge exist,—the division is healed and the cause of all our limitation and discord and weakness and
discontent is abolished. But knowledge is not complete without works; for the Will in being also is God and not
the being or its self-aware silent existence alone, and if works find their culmination in knowledge, knowledge
also finds its fulfilment in works. And, here too, love is the crown of knowledge; for love is the delight of union,
and unity must be conscious of joy of union to find all the riches of its own delight. Perfect knowledge indeed
leads to perfect love, integral knowledge to a rounded and multitudinous richness of love. “He who knows me”
says the Gita “as the supreme Purusha,”—not only as the immutable oneness, but in the many-souled movement
of the divine and as that, superior to both, in which both are divinely held,—“he, because he has the integral
knowledge, seeks me by love in every way of his being.” This is the trinity of our powers, the union of all three in
God to which we arrive when we start from knowledge.
\par Love is the crown of all being and its way of fulfilment, that by which it rises to all intensity and all fullness
and the ecstasy of utter self-finding. For if the Being is in its very nature consciousness and by consciousness we
become one with it, therefore by perfect knowledge of it fulfilled in identity, yet is delight the
Page 546

nature of consciousness and of the acme of delight love is the key and the secret. And if will is the power of
conscious being by which it fulfils itself and by union in will we become one with the Being in its characteristic
infinite power, yet all the works of that power start from delight, live in the delight, have delight for their aim and
end; love of the Being in itself and in all of itself that its power of consciousness manifests, is the way to the
perfect wideness of the Ananda. Love is the power and passion of the divine self-delight and without love we
may get the rapt peace of its infinity, the absorbed silence of the Ananda, but not its absolute depth of richness
and fullness. Love leads us from the suffering of division into the bliss of perfect union, but without losing that joy
of the act of union which is the soul's greatest discovery and for which the life of the cosmos is a long
preparation. Therefore to approach God by love is to prepare oneself for the greatest possible spiritual fulfilment.
\par Love fulfilled does not exclude knowledge, but itself brings knowledge; and the completer the knowledge,
the richer the possibility of love. “By Bhakti” says the Lord in the Gita “shall a man know Me in all my extent
and greatness and as I am in the principles of my being, and when he has known Me in the principles of my
being, then he enters into Me.” Love without knowledge is a passionate and intense, but blind, crude, often
dangerous thing, a great power, but also a stumbling-block; love, limited in knowledge, condemns itself in its
fervour and often by its very fervour to narrowness; but love leading to perfect knowledge brings the infinite and
absolute union. Such love is not inconsistent with, but rather throws itself with joy into divine works; for it loves
God and is one with him in all his being, and therefore in all beings, and to work for the world is then to feel and
fulfil multitudinously one's love for God. This is the trinity of our powers, the union of all three in God to which
we arrive when we start on our journey by the path of devotion with Love for the Angel of the Way to find in the
ecstasy of the divine delight of the All-Lover's being the fulfilment of ours, its secure home and blissful
abiding-place and the centre of its universal radiation.
Page 547

\par Since then in the union of these three powers lies our base of perfection, the seeker of an integral
self-fulfilment in the Divine must avoid or throw away, if he has them at all, the misunderstanding and mutual
depreciation which we often find existent between the followers of the three paths. Those who have the cult of
knowledge seem often, if not to despise, yet to look downward from their dizzy eminence on the path of the
devotee as if it were a thing inferior, ignorant, good only for souls that are not yet ready for the heights of the
Truth. It is true that devotion without knowledge is often a thing raw, crude, blind and dangerous, as the errors,
crimes, follies of the religious have too often shown. But this is because devotion in them has not found its own
path, its own real principle, has not therefore really entered on the path, but is fumbling and feeling after it, is on
one of the bypaths that lead to it; and knowledge too at this stage is as imperfect as devotion, dogmatic,
schismatic, intolerant, bound up in the narrowness of some single and exclusive principle, even that being usually
very imperfectly seized. When the devotee has grasped the power that shall raise him, has really laid hold on
love, that in the end purifies and enlarges him as effectively as knowledge can; they are equal powers, though
their methods of arriving at the same goal are different. The pride of the philosopher looking down on the passion
of the devotee arises, as does all pride, from a certain deficiency of his nature; for the intellect too exclusively
developed misses what the heart has to offer. The intellect is not in every way superior to the heart; if it opens
more readily doors at which the heart is apt to fumble in vain, it is, itself, apt to miss truths which to the heart are
very near and easy to hold. And if when the way of thought deepens into spiritual experience, it arrives readily at
the etherial heights, pinnacles, skiey widenesses, it cannot without the aid of the heart fathom the intense and rich
abysses and oceanic depths of the divine being and the divine Ananda.
\par The way of Bhakti is supposed often to be necessarily inferior because it proceeds by worship which
belongs to that stage of spiritual experience where there is a difference, an \NH insufficient
Page 548

unity between the human soul and the Divine, because its very principle is love and love means always two, the
lover and the beloved, a dualism therefore, while oneness is the highest spiritual experience, and because it seeks
after the personal God while the Impersonal is the highest and the eternal truth, if not even the sole Reality. But
worship is only the first step on the path of devotion. Where external worship changes into the inner adoration,
real Bhakti begins; that deepens into the intensity of divine love; that love leads to the joy of closeness in our
relations with the Divine; the joy of closeness passes into the bliss of union. Love too as well as knowledge
brings us to a highest oneness and it gives to that oneness its greatest possible depth and intensity. It is true that
love returns gladly upon a difference in oneness, by which the oneness itself becomes richer and sweeter. But
here we may say that the heart is wiser than the thought, at least than that thought which fixes upon opposite
ideas of the Divine and concentrates on one to the exclusion of the other which seems its contrary, but is really
its complement and a means of its greatest fulfilment. This is the weakness of the mind that it limits itself by its
thoughts, its positive and negative ideas, the aspects of the Divine Reality that it sees, and tends too much to pit
one against the other.
\par Thought in the mind, \s{vic\=ara}, the philosophic trend by which mental knowledge approaches the Divine, is
apt to lend a greater importance to the abstract over the concrete, to that which is high and remote over that
which is intimate and near. It finds a greater truth in the delight of the One in itself, a lesser truth or even a
falsehood in the delight of the One in the Many and of the Many in the One, a greater truth in the impersonal and
the Nirguna, a lesser truth or a falsehood in the personal and the Saguna. But the Divine is beyond our
oppositions of ideas, beyond the logical contradictions we make between his aspects. He is not, we have seen,
bound and restricted by exclusive unity; his oneness realises itself in infinite variation and to the joy of that love
has the completest key, without therefore missing the joy of the unity. The highest knowledge and highest
spiritual \NH experience by knowledge find his oneness as perfect in his
Page 549

\NH various relations with the Many as in his self-absorbed delight. If to thought the Impersonal seems the wider
and higher truth, the Personal a narrower experience, the spirit finds both of them to be aspects of a Reality
which figures itself in both, and if there is a knowledge of that Reality to which thought arrives by insistence on
the infinite Impersonality, there is also a knowledge of it to which love arrives by insistence on the infinite
Personality. The spiritual experience of each leads, if followed to the end, to the same ultimate Truth. By Bhakti
as by knowledge, as the Gita tells us, we arrive at unity with the Purushottama, the Supreme who contains in
himself the impersonal and numberless personalities, the qualitiless and infinite qualities, pure being,
consciousness and delight and the endless play of their relations.
\par The devotee on the other hand tends to look down on the sawdust dryness of mere knowledge. And it is true
that philosophy by itself without the rapture of spiritual experience is something as dry as it is clear and cannot
give all the satisfaction we seek, that its spiritual experience even, when it has not left its supports of thought and
shot up beyond the mind, lives too much in an abstract delight and that what it reaches, is not indeed the void it
seems to the passion of the heart, but still has the limitations of the peaks. On the other hand, love itself is not
complete without knowledge. The Gita distinguishes \NH between three initial kinds of Bhakti, that which seeks
refuge in the Divine from the sorrows of the world, \s{\=arta}, that which, desiring, approaches the Divine as the
giver of its good, \s{arth\=arth\=i}, and that which attracted by what it already loves, but does not yet know, yearns
to know this divine Unknown, \s{jij\~n\=asu}; but it gives the palm to the Bhakti that knows. Evidently the intensity of
passion which says, “I do not understand, I love,” and, loving, cares not to understand, is not love's last
self-expression, but its first, nor is it its highest intensity. Rather as knowledge of the Divine grows, delight in the
Divine and love of it must increase. Nor can mere rapture be secure without the foundation of knowledge; to live
in what we love, gives that security, and to live in it means to be one with it in consciousness, and oneness of
consciousness is the perfect condition of knowledge. Knowledge of the Divine
Page 550

gives to love of the Divine its firmest security, opens to it its own widest joy of experience, raises it to its highest
pinnacles of outlook.
\par If the mutual misunderstandings of these two powers are an ignorance, no less so is the tendency of both to
look down on the way of works as inferior to their own loftier pitch of spiritual achievement. There is an intensity
of love, as there is an intensity of knowledge, to which works seem something outward and distracting. But
works are only thus outward and distracting when we have not found oneness of will and consciousness with the
Supreme. When once that is found, works become the very power of knowledge and the very outpouring of love.
If knowledge is the very state of oneness and love its bliss, divine works are the living power of its light and
sweetness. There is a movement of love, as in the aspiration of human love, to separate the lover and the loved
in the enjoyment of their exclusive oneness away from the world and from all others, shut up in the nuptial
chambers of the heart. That is perhaps an inevitable movement of this path. But still the widest love fulfilled in
knowledge sees the world not as something other and hostile to this joy, but as the being of the Beloved and all
creatures as his being, and in that vision divine works find their joy and their justification.
\par This is the knowledge in which an integral Yoga must live. We have to start Godward from the powers of
the mind, the intellect, the will, the heart, and in the mind all is limited. Limitations, exclusiveness there can hardly
fail to be at the beginning and for a long time on the way. But an integral Yoga will wear these more loosely than
more exclusive ways of seeking, and it will sooner emerge from the mental necessity. It may commence with the
way of love, as with the way of knowledge or of works; but where they meet, is the beginning of its joy of
fulfilment. Love it cannot miss, even if it does not start from it; for love is the crown of works and the flowering
of knowledge.
Page 551

\par
\hn Chapter II
\par
\ht The Motives of Devotion
\par\drop All religion begins with the conception of some Power or existence greater and higher than our limited
and mortal selves, a thought and act of worship done to that Power, and an obedience offered to its will, its laws
or its demands. But Religion, in its beginnings, sets an immeasurable gulf between the Power thus conceived,
worshipped and obeyed and the worshipper. Yoga in its culmination abolishes the gulf; for Yoga is union. We
arrive at union with it through knowledge; for as our first obscure conceptions of it clarify, enlarge, deepen, we
come to recognise it as our own highest self, the origin and sustainer of our being and that towards which it
tends. We arrive at union with it through works; for from simply obeying we come to identify our will with its
Will, since only in proportion as it is identified with this Power that is its source and ideal, can our will become
perfect and divine. We arrive at union with it also by worship; for the thought and act of a distant worship
develops into the necessity of close adoration and this into the intimacy of love, and the consummation of love is
union with the Beloved. It is from this development of worship that the Yoga of devotion starts and it is by this
union with the Beloved that it finds its highest point and consummation.
\par All our instincts and the movements of our being begin by supporting themselves on the ordinary motives of
our lower human nature,—mixed and egoistic motives at first, but afterwards they purify and elevate themselves,
they become an intense and special need of our higher nature quite apart from the results our actions bring with
them; finally they exalt themselves into a sort of categorical imperative of our being, and it is through our
obedience to this that we arrive at that supreme something self-existent in us which was all the time drawing us
towards it, first by the lures of our egoistic nature, then by something much
Page 552

higher, larger, more universal, until we are able to feel its own direct attraction which is the strongest and most
imperative of all. In the transformation of ordinary religious worship into the Yoga of pure Bhakti we see this
development from the motived and interested worship of popular religion into a principle of motiveless and
self-existent love. This last is in fact the touchstone of the real Bhakti and shows whether we are really in the
central way or are only upon one of the bypaths leading to it. We have to throw away the props of our
weakness, the motives of the ego, the lures of our lower nature before we can deserve the divine union.
\par Faced with the sense of a Power or perhaps a number of Powers greater and higher than himself by whom
his life in Nature is overshadowed, influenced, governed, man naturally applies to it or to them the first primitive
feelings of the natural being among the difficulties, desires and dangers of that life,—fear and interest. The
enormous part played by these motives in the evolution of the religious instinct, is undeniable, and in fact, man
being what he is, it could hardly have been less; and even when religion has advanced fairly far on its road, we
see these motives still surviving, active, playing a sufficiently large part, justified and appealed to by Religion
herself in support of her claims on man. The fear of God, it is said,—or, it may be added for the sake of historical
truth, the fear of the Gods,—is the beginning of religion, a half-truth upon which scientific research, trying to
trace the evolution of religion, ordinarily in a critical and often a hostile rather than in a sympathetic spirit, has laid
undue emphasis. But not the fear of God only, for man does not act, even most primitively, from fear alone, but
from twin motives, fear and desire, fear of things unpleasant and maleficent and desire of things pleasant and
beneficent,—therefore from fear and interest. Life to him is primarily and engrossingly,—until he learns to live
more in his soul and only secondarily in the action and reaction of outward things,—a series of actions and
results, things to be desired, pursued and gained by action and things to be dreaded and shunned, yet which may
come upon him as a result of action. And it is not only by his own
Page 553

action but by that also of others and of Nature around him that these things come to him. As soon, then, as he
comes to sense a Power behind all this which can influence or determine action and result, he conceives of it as
a dispenser of boons and sufferings, able and under certain conditions willing to help him or hurt, save and
destroy.
\par In the most primitive parts of his being he conceives of it as a thing of natural egoistic impulses like himself,
beneficent when pleased, maleficent when offended; worship is then a means of propitiation by gifts and a
supplication by prayer. He gets God on his side by praying to him and flattering him. With a more advanced
mentality, he conceives of the action of life as reposing on a certain principle of divine justice, which he reads
always according to his own ideas and character, as a sort of enlarged copy of his human justice; he conceives
the idea of moral good and evil and looks upon suffering and calamity and all things unpleasant as a punishment
for his sins and upon happiness and good fortune and all things pleasant as a reward of his virtue. God appears to
him as a king, judge, legislator, executor of justice. But still regarding him as a sort of magnified Man, he
imagines that as his own justice can be deflected by prayers and propitiation, so the divine justice can also be
deflected by the same means. Justice is to him reward and punishment, and the justice of punishment can be
modified by mercy to the suppliant, while rewards can be supplemented by special favours and kindness such as
Power when pleased can always bestow on its adherents and worshippers. Moreover God like ourselves is
capable of wrath and revenge, and wrath and revenge can be turned by gifts and supplication and atonement; he
is capable too of partiality, and his partiality can be attracted by gifts, by prayer and by praise. Therefore instead
of relying solely on the observation of the moral law, worship as prayer and propitiation is still continued.
\par Along with these motives there arises another development of personal feeling, first of the awe which one
naturally feels for something vast, powerful and incalculable beyond our nature by a certain inscrutability in the
springs and extent of its action,
Page 554

and of the veneration and adoration which one feels for that which is higher in its nature or its perfection than
ourselves. For, even while preserving largely the idea of a God endowed with the qualities of human nature, there
still grows up along with it, mixed up with it or superadded, the conception of an omniscience, an omnipotence
and a mysterious perfection quite other than our nature. A confused mixture of all these motives, variously
developed, often modified, subtilised or glossed over, is what constitutes nine tenths of popular religion; the other
tenth is a suffusion of the rest by the percolation into it of nobler, more beautiful and profounder ideas of the
Divine which minds of a greater spirituality have been able to bring into the more primitive religious concepts of
mankind. The result is usually crude enough and a ready target for the shafts of scepticism and
unbelief,—powers of the human mind which have their utility even for faith and religion, since they compel a
religion to purify gradually what is crude or false in its conceptions. But what we have to see is how far in
purifying and elevating the religious instinct of worship any of these earlier motives need to survive and enter into
the Yoga of devotion which itself starts from worship. That depends on how far they correspond to any truth of
the divine Being and its relations with the human soul; for we seek by Bhakti union with the Divine and true
relation with it, with its truth and not with any mirage of our lower nature and of its egoistic impulses and ignorant
conceptions.
\par The ground on which sceptical unbelief assails Religion, namely, that there is in fact no conscient Power or
Being in the universe greater and higher than ourselves or in any way influencing or controlling our existence, is
one which Yoga cannot accept, as that would contradict all spiritual experience and make Yoga itself impossible.
Yoga is not a matter of theory or dogma, like philosophy or popular religion, but a matter of experience. Its
experience is that of a conscient universal and supracosmic Being with whom it brings us into union, and this
conscious experience of union with the Invisible, always renewable and verifiable, is as valid as our conscious
experience of a physical world and of visible bodies with whose invisible minds
Page 555

we daily communicate. Yoga proceeds by conscious union, the conscious being is its instrument, and a conscious
union with the Inconscient cannot be. It is true that it goes beyond the human consciousness and in Samadhi
becomes superconscient, but this is not an annullation of our conscious being, it is only its self-exceeding, the
going beyond its present level and normal limits.
\par So far, then, all Yogic experience is agreed. But Religion and the Yoga of Bhakti go farther; they attribute to
this Being a Personality and human relations with the human being. In both the human being approaches the
Divine by means of his humanity, with human emotions, as he would approach a fellow-being, but with more
intense and exalted feelings; and not only so, but the Divine also responds in a manner answering to these
emotions. In that possibility of response lies the whole question; for if the Divine is impersonal, featureless and
relationless, no such response is possible and all human approach to it becomes an absurdity; we must rather
dehumanise, depersonalise, annul ourselves in so far as we are human beings or any kind of beings; on no other
conditions and by no other means can we approach it. Love, fear, prayer, praise, worship of an Impersonality
which has no relation with us or with anything in the universe and no feature that our minds can lay hold of, are
obviously an irrational foolishness. On such terms religion and devotion become out of the question. The
Adwaitin in order to find a religious basis for his bare and sterile philosophy, has to admit the practical existence
of God and the gods and to delude his mind with the language of Maya. Buddhism only became a popular religion
when Buddha had taken the place of the supreme Deity as an object of worship.
\par Even if the Supreme be capable of relations with us but only of impersonal relations, religion is robbed of its
human vitality and the Path of Devotion ceases to be effective or even possible. We may indeed apply our
human emotions to it, but in a vague and imprecise fashion, with no hope of a human response: the only way in
which it can respond to us, is by stilling our emotions and throwing upon us its own impersonal calm and
immutable
Page 556

equality; and this is what in fact happens when we approach the pure impersonality of the Godhead. We can
obey it as a Law, lift our souls to it in aspiration towards its tranquil being, grow into it by shedding from us our
emotional nature; the human being in us is not satisfied, but it is quieted, balanced, stilled. But the Yoga of
devotion, agreeing in this with Religion, insists on a closer and warmer worship than this impersonal aspiration. It
aims at a divine fulfilment of the humanity in us as well as of the impersonal part of our being; it aims at a divine
satisfaction of the emotional being of man. It demands of the Supreme acceptance of our love and a response in
kind; as we delight in Him and seek Him, so it believes that He too delights in us and seeks us. Nor can this
demand be condemned as irrational, for if the supreme and universal Being did not take any delight in us, it is not
easy to see how we could have come into being or could remain in being, and if He does not at all draw us
towards him,—a divine seeking of us,—there would seem to be no reason in Nature why we should turn from
the round of our normal existence to seek Him.
\par Therefore that there may be at all any possibility of a Yoga of devotion, we must assume first that the
supreme Existence is not an abstraction or a state of existence, but a conscious Being; secondly, that he meets
us in the universe and is in some way immanent in it as well as its source,—otherwise, we should have to go out
of cosmic life to meet him; thirdly, that he is capable of personal relations with us and must therefore be not
incapable of personality; finally, that when we approach him by our human emotions, we receive a response in
kind. This does not mean that the nature of the Divine is precisely the same as our human nature though upon a
larger scale, or that it is that nature pure of certain perversions and God a magnified or else an ideal Man. God is
not and cannot be an ego limited by his qualities as we are in our normal consciousness. But on the other hand
our human consciousness must certainly originate and have been derived from the Divine; though the forms
which it takes in us may and must be other than the divine because we are limited by ego, not universal, not
superior to our nature, not
Page 557

greater than our qualities and their workings, as he is, still our human emotions and impulses must have behind
them a Truth in him of which they are the limited and very often, therefore, the perverse or even the degraded
forms. By approaching him through our emotional being we approach that Truth, it comes down to us to meet our
emotions and lift them towards it; through it our emotional being is united with him.
\par Secondly, this supreme Being is also the universal Being and our relations with the universe are all means by
which we are prepared for entering into relation with him. All the emotions with which we confront the action of
the universal existence upon us, are really directed towards him, in ignorance at first, but it is by directing them in
growing knowledge towards him that we enter into more intimate relations with him, and all that is false and
ignorant in them will fall away as we draw nearer towards unity. To all of them he answers, taking us in the
stage of progress in which we are; for if we met no kind of response or help to our imperfect approach, the more
perfect relations could never be established. Even as men approach him, so he accepts them and responds too by
the divine Love to their bhakti, \s{tathaiva bhajate}. Whatever form of being, whatever qualities they lend to him,
through that form and those qualities he helps them to develop, encourages or governs their advance and in their
straight way or their crooked draws them towards him. What they see of him is a truth, but a truth represented to
them in the terms of their own being and consciousness, partially, distortedly, not in the terms of its own higher
reality, not in the aspect which it assumes when we become aware of the complete Divinity. This is the
justification of the cruder and more primitive elements of religion and also their sentence of transience and
passing. They are justified because there is a truth of the Divine behind them and only so could that truth of the
Divine be approached in that stage of the developing human consciousness and be helped forward; they are
condemned, because to persist always in these crude conceptions and relations with the Divine is to miss that
closer union towards which these crude beginnings are the first steps, however faltering.
Page 558

\par All life, we have said, is a Yoga of Nature; here in this material world life is her reaching out from her first
inconscience towards a return to union with the conscient Divine from whom she proceeded. In religion the mind
of man, her accomplished instrument, becomes aware of her goal in him, responds to her aspiration. Even
popular religion is a sort of ignorant Yoga of devotion. But it does not become what we specifically call Yoga
until the motive becomes in a certain degree clairvoyant, until it sees that union is its object and that love is the
principle of union, and until therefore it tries to realise love and lose its separative character in love. When that
has been accomplished, then the Yoga has taken its decisive step and is sure of its fruition. Thus the motives of
devotion have first to direct themselves engrossingly and predominantly towards the Divine, then to transform
themselves so that they are rid of their more earthy elements and finally to take their stand in pure and perfect
love. All those that cannot coexist with the perfect union of love, must eventually fall away, while only those that
can form themselves into expressions of divine love and into means of enjoying divine love, can remain. For love
is the one emotion in us which can be entirely motiveless and self-existent; love need have no other motive than
love. For all our emotions arise either from the seeking after delight and the possession of it, or from the baffling
of the search, or from the failure of the delight we have possessed or had thought to grasp; but love is that by
which we can enter directly into possession of the self-existent delight of the divine Being. Divine love is indeed
itself that possession and, as it were, the body of the Ananda.
\par These are the truths which condition our approach to this Yoga and our journey on this path. There are
subsidiary questions which arise and trouble the intellect of man, but, though we may have yet to deal with them
they are not essential. Yoga of Bhakti is a matter of the heart and not of the intellect. For even for the
knowledge which comes on this way, we set out from the heart and not from the intelligence. The truth of the
motives of the heart's devotion and their final arrival and in some sort their disappearance into the supreme and
unique self-existent motive
Page 559

of love, is therefore all that initially and essentially concerns us. Such difficult questions there are as whether the
Divine has an original supraphysical form or power of form from which all forms proceed or is eternally
formless; all we need at present say is that the Divine does at least accept the various forms which the devotee
gives to him and through them meets him in love, while the mixing of our spirits with his spirit is essential to the
fruition of Bhakti. So too, certain religions and religious philosophies seek to bind down devotion by a conception
of an eternal difference between the human soul and the Divine, without which they say love and devotion
cannot exist, while that philosophy which considers that One alone exists, consigns love and devotion to a
movement in the ignorance, necessary perhaps or at the least useful as a preparatory movement while yet the
ignorance lasts, but impossible when all difference is abolished and therefore to be transcended and discarded.
We may hold, however, the truth of the one existence in this sense that all in Nature is the Divine even though
God be more than all in Nature, and love becomes then a movement by which the Divine in Nature and man
takes possession of and enjoys the delight of the universal and the supreme Divine. In any case, love has
necessarily a twofold fulfilment by its very nature, that by which the lover and the beloved enjoy their union in
difference and all too that enhances the joy of various union, and that by which they throw themselves into each
other and become one Self. That truth is quite sufficient to start with, for it is the very nature of love, and since
love is the essential motive of this Yoga, as is the whole nature of love, so will be too the crown and fulfilment of
the movement of the Yoga.
Page 560

\par
\hn Chapter III
\par
\ht The Godward Emotions
\par\drop The principle of Yoga is to turn Godward all or any of the powers of the human consciousness so that
through that activity of the being there may be contact, relation, union. In the Yoga of Bhakti it is the emotional
nature that is made the instrument. Its main principle is to adopt some human relation between man and the
Divine Being by which through the ever intenser flowing of the heart's emotions towards him the human soul
may at last be wedded to and grow one with him in a passion of divine Love. It is not ultimately the pure peace
of oneness or the power and desireless will of oneness, but the ecstatic joy of union which the devotee seeks by
his Yoga. Every feeling that can make the heart ready for this ecstasy the Yoga admits; everything that detracts
from it must increasingly drop away as the strong union of love becomes closer and more perfect.
\par All the feelings with which religion approaches the worship, service and love of God, the Yoga admits, if not
as its final accompaniments, yet as preparatory movements of the emotional nature. But there is one feeling with
which the Yoga, at least as practised in India, has very little dealing. In certain religions, in most perhaps, the idea
of the fear of God plays a very large part, sometimes the largest, and the Godfearing man is the typical
worshipper of these religions. The sentiment of fear is indeed perfectly consistent with devotion of a certain kind
and up to a certain point; at its highest it rises into a worship of the divine Power, the divine Justice, divine Law,
divine Righteousness, and ethical obedience, an awed reverence for the almighty Creator and Judge. Its motive is
therefore ethico-religious and it belongs not so strictly to the devotee, but to the man of works moved by a
devotion to the divine ordainer and judge of his works. It regards God as the King and does not approach too
near the
Page 561

glory of his throne unless justified by righteousness or led there by a mediator who will turn away the divine
wrath for sin. Even when it draws nearest, it keeps an awed distance between itself and the high object of its
worship. It cannot embrace the Divine with all the fearless confidence of the child in his mother or of the lover in
his beloved or with that intimate sense of oneness which perfect love brings with it.
\par The origin of this divine fear was crude enough in some of the primitive popular religions. It was the
perception of powers in the world greater than man, obscure in their nature and workings, which seemed always
ready to strike him down in his prosperity and to smite him for any actions which displeased them. Fear of the
gods arose from man's ignorance of God and his ignorance of the laws that govern the world. It attributed to the
higher powers caprice and human passion; it made them in the image of the great ones of the earth, capable of
whim, tyranny, personal enmity, jealous of any greatness in man which might raise him above the littleness of
terrestrial nature and bring him too near to the divine nature. With such notions no real devotion could arise,
except that doubtful kind which the weaker may feel for the stronger whose protection he can buy by worship
and gifts and propitiation and obedience to such laws as he may have laid upon those beneath him and may
enforce by rewards and punishments, or else the submissive and prostrate reverence and adoration which one
may feel for a greatness, glory, wisdom, sovereign power which is above the world and is the source or at any
rate the regulator of all its laws and happenings.
\par A nearer approach to the beginnings of the way of devotion becomes possible when this element of divine
Power disengages itself from these crudities and fixes on the idea of a divine ruler, creator of the world and
master of the Law who governs the earth and heavens and is the guide and helper and saviour of his creatures.
This larger and higher idea of the divine Being long kept many elements and still keeps some elements of the old
crudity. The Jews who brought it forward most prominently and from whom it overspread a great part of the
world, could
Page 562

believe in a God of righteousness who was exclusive, arbitrary, wrathful, jealous, often cruel and even wantonly
sanguinary. Even now it is possible for some to believe in a Creator who has made heaven and hell, an eternal
hell, the two poles of his creation, and has even according to some religions predestined the souls he has created
not only to sin and punishment, but to an eternal damnation. But even apart from these extravagances of a
childish religious belief, the idea of the almighty Judge, Legislator, King, is a crude and imperfect idea of the
Divine, when taken by itself, because it takes an inferior and an external truth for the main truth and it tends to
prevent a higher approach to a more intimate reality. It exaggerates the importance of the sense of sin and
thereby prolongs and increases the soul's fear and self-distrust and weakness. It attaches the pursuit of virtue
and the shunning of sin to the idea of rewards and punishment, though given in an after life, and makes them
dependent on the lower motives of fear and interest instead of the higher spirit which should govern the ethical
being. It makes hell and heaven and not the Divine himself the object of the human soul in its religious living.
These crudities have served their turn in the slow education of the human mind, but they are of no utility to the
Yogin who knows that whatever truth they may represent belongs rather to the external relations of the
developing human soul with the external law of the universe than any intimate truth of the inner relations of the
human soul with the Divine; but it is these which are the proper field of Yoga.
\par Still out of this conception there arise certain developments which bring us nearer to the threshold of the
Yoga of devotion. First, there can emerge the idea of the Divine as the source and law and aim of our ethical
being and from this there can come the knowledge of him as the highest Self to which our active nature aspires,
the Will to which we have to assimilate our will, the eternal Right and Purity and Truth and Wisdom into harmony
with which our nature has to grow and towards whose being our being is attracted. By this way we arrive at the
Yoga of works, and this Yoga has a place for personal devotion to the Divine, for the divine Will appears as the
Master of our works
Page 563

to whose voice we must listen, whose divine impulsion we must obey and whose work it is the sole business of
our active life and will to do. Secondly, there emerges the idea of the divine Spirit, the father of all who extends
his wings of benignant protection and love over all his creatures, and from that grows between the soul and the
Divine the relation of father and child, a relation of love, and as a result the relation of brotherhood with our
fellow-beings. These relations of the Divine into the calm pure light of whose nature we have to grow and the
Master whom we approach through works and service, the Father who responds to the love of the soul that
approaches him as the child, are admitted elements of the Yoga of devotion.
\par The moment we come well into these developments and their deeper spiritual meaning, the motive of the
fear of God becomes otiose, superfluous and even impossible. It is of \NH importance chiefly in the ethical field
when the soul has not yet grown sufficiently to follow good for its own sake and needs an authority above it
whose wrath or whose stern passionless judgment it can fear and found upon that fear its fidelity to virtue. When
we grow into spirituality, this motive can no longer remain except by the lingering on of some confusion in the
mind, some persistence of the old mentality. Moreover, the ethical aim in Yoga is different from that of the
external idea of virtue. Ordinarily, ethics is regarded as a sort of machinery of right action, the act is everything
and how to do the right act is the whole question and the whole trouble. But to the Yogin action is chiefly
important not for its own sake, but rather as a means for the growth of the soul Godward. Therefore what Indian
spiritual writings lay stress upon is not so much the quality of the action to be done as the quality of the soul from
which the \NH action flows, upon its truth, fearlessness, purity, love, compassion, benevolence, absence of the
will to hurt, and upon the actions as their outflowings. The old western idea that human nature is intrinsically bad
and virtue is a thing to be followed out in despite of our fallen nature to which it is contrary, is foreign to the
Indian mentality trained from ancient times in the ideas of the Yogins. Our nature contains, as well as
Page 564

its passionate rajasic and its downward-tending tamasic quality, a purer sattwic element and it is the
encouragement of this, its highest part, which is the business of ethics. By it we increase the divine nature,
\s{daiv\=i prak\,rti}, which is present in us and get rid of the Titanic and demoniac elements. Not therefore the
Hebraic righteousness of the Godfearing man, but the purity, love, beneficence, truth, fearlessness, harmlessness
of the saint and the God-lover are the goal of the ethical growth according to this notion. And, speaking more
largely, to grow into the divine nature is the consummation of the ethical being. This can be done best by realising
God as the higher Self, the guiding and uplifting Will or the Master whom we love and serve. Not fear of him, but
love of him and aspiration to the freedom and eternal purity of his being must be the motive.
\par Certainly, fear enters into the relations of the master and the servant and even of the father and the child,
but only when they are on the human level, when control and subjection and punishment figure predominantly in
them and love is obliged to efface itself more or less behind the mask of authority. The Divine even as the
Master does not punish anybody, does not threaten, does not force obedience. It is the human soul that has freely
to come to the Divine and offer itself to his overpowering force that he may seize and uplift it towards his own
divine levels, and give it that joy of mastery of the finite nature by the Infinite and of service to the Highest by
which there comes freedom from the ego and the lower nature. Love is the key of this relation, and this service,
\s{d\=asyam}, is in Indian Yoga the happy service of the divine Friend or the passionate service to the divine
Beloved. The Master of the worlds who in the Gita demands of his servant, the bhakta, to be nothing more in life
than his instrument, makes this claim as the friend, the guide, the higher Self, and describes himself as the Lord
of all the worlds who is the friend of all creatures, \s{sarvalokamahe\'svara\.m suh\,rda\.m sarvabh\=ut\=an\=am}; the two
relations in fact must go together and neither can be perfect without the other. So too it is not the fatherhood of
God as the Creator who demands obedience because he is the maker of our being, but the fatherhood of love
which leads us towards
Page 565

the closer soul-union of Yoga. Love is the real key in both, and perfect love is inconsistent with the admission of
the motive of fear. Closeness of the human soul to the Divine is the object, and fear sets always a barrier and a
distance; even awe and reverence for the divine Power are a sign of distance and division and they disappear in
the intimacy of the union of love. Moreover, fear belongs to the lower nature, to the lower self, and in
approaching the higher Self must be put aside before we can enter into its presence.
\par This relation of the divine fatherhood and the closer relation with the Divine as the Mother-Soul of the
universe have their springs in another early religious motive. One type of the Bhakta, says the Gita, is the
devotee who comes to the Divine as the giver of his wants, the giver of his good, the satisfier of the needs of his
inner and his outer being. “I bring to my bhakta” says the Lord “his getting and his having of
good,\s{yogak\,sema\.m vah\=amyaham}.” The life of man is a life of wants and needs and therefore of desires, not
only in his physical and vital, but in his mental and spiritual being. When he becomes conscious of a greater
Power governing the world, he approaches it through prayer for the fulfilment of his needs, for help in his rough
journey, for protection and aid in his struggle. Whatever crudities there may be in the ordinary religious approach
to God by prayer, and there are many, especially that attitude which imagines the Divine as if capable of being
propitiated, bribed, flattered into acquiescence or indulgence by praise, entreaty and gifts and has often little
regard to the spirit in which he is \NH approached, still this way of turning to the Divine is an essential movement
of our religious being and reposes on a universal truth.
\par The efficacy of prayer is often doubted and prayer itself supposed to be a thing irrational and necessarily
superfluous and ineffective. It is true that the universal will executes always its aim and cannot be deflected by
egoistic propitiation and entreaty, it is true of the Transcendent who expresses himself in the universal order that
being omniscient his larger knowledge must foresee the thing to be done and it does not need direction or
Page 566

stimulation by human thought and that the individual's desires are not and cannot be in any world-order the true
determining factor. But neither is that order or the execution of the universal will altogether effected by
mechanical Law, but by powers and forces of which for human life at least human will, aspiration and faith are
not among the least important. Prayer is only a particular form given to that will, aspiration and faith. Its forms
are very often crude and not only childlike, which is in itself no defect, but childish; but still it has a real power
and significance. Its power and sense is to put the will, aspiration and faith of man into touch with the divine Will
as that of a conscious Being with whom we can enter into conscious and living relations. For our will and
aspiration can act either by our own strength and endeavour, which can no doubt be made a thing great and
effective whether for lower or higher purposes,—and there are plenty of disciplines which put it forward as the
one force to be used,—or it can act in dependence upon and with subordination to the divine or the universal
Will. And this latter way again may either look upon that Will as responsive indeed to our aspiration, but almost
mechanically, by a sort of law of energy, or at any rate quite impersonally, or else it may look upon it as
responding consciously to the divine aspiration and faith of the human soul and consciously bringing to it the help,
the guidance, the protection and fruition demanded,\s{yogak\,sema\.m vah\=amyaham}.
\par Prayer helps to prepare this relation for us at first on the lower plane even while it is there consistent with
much that is mere egoism and self-delusion; but afterwards we can draw towards the spiritual truth which is
behind it. It is not then the giving of the thing asked for that matters, but the relation itself, the contact of man's
life with God, the conscious interchange. In spiritual matters and in the seeking of spiritual gains, this conscious
relation is a great power; it is a much greater power than our own entirely self-reliant struggle and effort and it
brings a fuller spiritual growth and experience. Necessarily in the end prayer either ceases in the greater thing
for which it prepared us,—in fact the form we call prayer is not itself essential so long
Page 567

as the faith, the will, the aspiration are there,—or remains only for the joy of the relation. Also its objects, the
\s{artha} or interest it seeks to realise, become higher and higher until we reach the highest motiveless devotion,
which is that of divine love pure and simple without any other demand or longing.
\par The relations which arise out of this attitude towards the Divine, are that of the divine Father and the Mother
with the child and that of the divine Friend. To the Divine as these things the human soul comes for help, for
protection, for guidance, for fruition,—or if knowledge be the aim, to the Guide, Teacher, Giver of light, for the
Divine is the Sun of knowledge,—or it comes in pain and suffering for relief and solace and deliverance, it may
be deliverance either from the suffering itself or from the world-existence which is the habitat of the suffering or
from all its inner and real causes.
\note{These are three of the four classes of devotee which are recognised by the Gita, \s{\=arta}, \s{arth\=arth\=i},
\s{jij\~n\=asu}, the distressed, the seeker of personal objects and the seeker of God-knowledge.} In these things we
find there is a certain gradation. For the relation of fatherhood is always less close, intense, passionate, intimate,
and therefore it is less resorted to in the Yoga which seeks for the closest union. That of the divine Friend is a
thing sweeter and more intimate, admits of an equality and intimacy even in inequality and the beginning of
mutual self-giving; at its closest when all idea of other giving and taking disappears, when this relation becomes
motiveless except for the one sole all-sufficing motive of love, it turns into the free and happy relation of the
playmate in the Lila of existence. But closer and more intimate still is the relation of the Mother and the child,
and that therefore plays a very large part wherever the religious impulse is most richly fervent and springs most
warmly from the heart of man. The soul goes to the Mother-Soul in all its desires and troubles and the divine
Mother wishes that it should be so, so that she may pour out her heart of love. It turns to her too because of the
self-existent nature of this love and because that points us to the home towards which we turn from our
wanderings in the world and to the bosom in which we find our rest.
Page 568

\par But the highest and the greatest relation is that which starts from none of the ordinary religious motives, but
is rather of the very essence of Yoga, springs from the very nature of love itself; it is the passion of the Lover
and the Beloved. Wherever there is the desire of the soul for its utter union with God, this form of the divine
yearning makes its way even into religions which seem to do without it and give it no place in their ordinary
system. Here the one thing asked for is love, the one thing feared is the loss of love, the one sorrow is the sorrow
of separation of love; for all other things either do not exist for the lover or come in only as incidents or as results
and not as objects or conditions of love. All love is indeed in its nature self-existent because it springs from a
secret oneness in being and a sense of that oneness or desire of oneness in the heart between souls that are yet
able to conceive of themselves as different from each other and divided. Therefore all these other relations too
can arrive at their self-existent motiveless joy of being for the sake of love alone. But still they start from and to
the end they to some extent find a satisfaction of their play in other motives. But here the beginning is love and
the end is love and the whole aim is love. There is indeed the desire of possession, but even this is overcome in
the fullness of the self-existent love and the final demand of the Bhakta is simply that his bhakti may never cease
nor diminish. He does not ask for heaven or for liberation from birth or for any other object, but only that his love
may be eternal and absolute.
\par Love is a passion and it seeks for two things, eternity and intensity, and in the relation of the Lover and
Beloved the seeking for eternity and for intensity is instinctive and self-born. Love is a seeking for mutual
possession, and it is here that the demand for mutual possession becomes absolute. Passing beyond desire of
possession which means a difference, it is a seeking for oneness, and it is here that the idea of oneness, of two
souls merging into each other and becoming one finds the acme of its longing and the utterness of its satisfaction.
Love, too, is a yearning for beauty, and it is here that the yearning is eternally satisfied in the vision and the touch
and the joy of the All-beautiful. Love
Page 569

is a child and a seeker of Delight, and it is here that it finds the highest possible ecstasy both of the
heart-consciousness and of every fibre of the being. Moreover, this relation is that which as between human
being and human being demands the most and, even while reaching the greatest intensities, is still the least
satisfied, because only in the Divine can it find its real and its utter satisfaction. Therefore it is here most that the
turning of human emotion Godwards finds its full meaning and discovers all the truth of which love is the human
symbol, all its essential instincts divinised, raised, satisfied in the bliss from which our life was born and towards
which by oneness it returns in the Ananda of the divine existence where love is absolute, eternal and unalloyed.
Page 570

\par
\hn Chapter IV
\par
\ht The Way of Devotion
\par\drop Bhakti in itself is as wide as the heart-yearning of the soul for the Divine and as simple and
straightforward as love and desire going straight towards their object. It cannot therefore be fixed down to any
systematic method, cannot found itself on a psychological science like the Rajayoga, or a psycho-physical like the
Hathayoga, or start from a definite intellectual process like the ordinary method of the Jnanayoga. It may employ
various means or supports, and man, having in him a tendency towards order, process and system, may try to
methodise his resort to these auxiliaries: but to give an account of their variations one would have to review
almost all man's numberless religions upon their side of inner approach to the Deity. Really, however, the more
intimate yoga of Bhakti resolves itself simply into these four movements, the desire of the Soul when it turns
towards God and the straining of its emotion towards him, the pain of love and the divine return of love, the
delight of love possessed and the play of that delight, and the eternal enjoyment of the divine Lover which is the
heart of celestial bliss. These are things that are at once too simple and too profound for methodising or for
analysis. One can at best only say, here are these four successive elements, steps, if we may so call them, of the
siddhi, and here are, largely, some of the means which it uses, and here again are some of the aspects and
experiences of the sadhana of devotion. We need only trace broadly the general line they follow before we turn
to consider how the way of devotion enters into a synthetic and integral Yoga, what place it takes there and how
its principle affects the other principles of divine living.
\par All Yoga is a turning of the human mind and the human soul, not yet divine in realisation, but feeling the
divine impulse and attraction in it, towards that by which it finds its greater
Page 571

being. Emotionally, the first form which this turning takes must be that of adoration. In ordinary religion this
adoration wears the form of external worship and that again develops a most external form of ceremonial
worship. This element is ordinarily necessary because the mass of men live in their physical minds, cannot realise
anything except by the force of a physical symbol and cannot feel that they are living anything except by the
force of a physical action. We might apply here the Tantric gradation of \sforced{s\=adhana}, which makes the
way of the \s{pa\'su}, the herd, the animal or physical being, the lowest stage of its discipline, and say that the
purely or predominantly ceremonial adoration is the first step of this lowest part of the way. It is evident that
even real religion,—and Yoga is something more than religion,—only begins when this quite outward worship
corresponds to something really felt within the mind, some genuine submission, awe or spiritual aspiration, to
which it becomes an aid, an outward expression and also a sort of periodical or constant reminder helping to
draw back the mind to it from the preoccupations of ordinary life. But so long as it is only an idea of the Godhead
to which one renders reverence or homage, we have not yet got to the beginning of Yoga. The aim of Yoga
being union, its beginning must always be a seeking after the Divine, a longing after some kind of touch,
closeness or possession. When this comes on us, the adoration becomes always primarily an inner worship; we
begin to make ourselves a temple of the Divine, our thoughts and feelings a constant prayer of aspiration and
seeking, our whole life an external service and worship. It is as this change, this new soul-tendency grows, that
the religion of the devotee becomes a Yoga, a growing contact and union. It does not follow that the outward
worship will necessarily be dispensed with, but it will increasingly become only a physical expression or
outflowing of the inner devotion and adoration, the wave of the soul throwing itself out in speech and symbolic
act.
\par Adoration, before it turns into an element of the deeper Yoga of devotion, a petal of the flower of love, its
homage and self-uplifting to its sun, must bring with it, if it is profound, an increasing consecration of the being to
the Divine who is adored.
Page 572

And one element of this consecration must be a self-purifying so as to become fit for the divine contact, or for
the entrance of the Divine into the temple of our inner being, or for his self-revelation in the shrine of the heart.
This purifying may be ethical in its character, but it will not be merely the moralist's seeking for the right and
blameless action or even, when once we reach the stage of Yoga, an obedience to the law of God as revealed in
formal religion; but it will be a throwing away, {\it katharsis}, of all that conflicts whether with the idea of the
Divine in himself or of the Divine in ourselves. In the former case it becomes in habit of feeling and outer act an
imitation of the Divine, in the latter a growing into his likeness in our nature. What inner adoration is to
ceremonial worship, this growing into the divine likeness is to the outward ethical life. It culminates in a sort of
liberation by likeness to the Divine,
\note{\s{s\=ad\,r\'sya-mukti}.} a liberation from our lower nature and a change into the divine nature.
\par Consecration becomes in its fullness a devoting of all our being to the Divine; therefore also of all our
thoughts and our works. Here the Yoga takes into itself the essential elements of the Yoga of works and the
Yoga of knowledge, but in its own manner and with its own peculiar spirit. It is a sacrifice of life and works to
the Divine, but a sacrifice of love more than a tuning of the will to the divine Will. The bhakta offers up his life
and all that he is and all that he has and all that he does to the Divine. This surrender may take the ascetic form,
as when he leaves the ordinary life of men and devotes his days solely to prayer and praise and worship or to
ecstatic meditation, gives up his personal possessions and becomes the monk or the mendicant whose one and
only possession is the Divine, gives up all actions in life except those only which help or belong to the communion
with the Divine and communion with other devotees, or at most keeps the doing from the secure fortress of the
ascetic life of those services to men which seem peculiarly the outflowing of the divine nature of love,
compassion and good. But there is the wider self-consecration, proper to any integral Yoga, which,
Page 573

accepting the fullness of life and the world in its entirety as the play of the Divine, offers up the whole being into
his possession; it is a holding of all one is and has as belonging to him only and not to ourselves and a doing of all
works as an offering to him. By this comes the complete active consecration of both the inner and the outer life,
the unmutilated self-giving.
\par There is also the consecration of the thoughts to the Divine. In its inception this is the attempt to fix the mind
on the \NH object of adoration,—for naturally the restless human mind is occupied with other objects and, even
when it is directed upwards, constantly drawn away by the world,—so that in the end it \NH habitually thinks of
him and all else is only secondary and thought of only in relation to him. This is done often with the aid of a
physical image or, more intimately and characteristically, of a mantra or a divine name through which the divine
being is realised. There are supposed by those who systematise to be three stages of the seeking through the
devotion of the mind, first, the constant hearing of the divine name, qualities and all that has been attached to
them, secondly, the constant thinking on them or on the divine being or personality, thirdly, the settling and fixing
of the mind on the object; and by this comes the full realisation. And by these, too, there comes when the
accompanying feeling or the concentration is very intense, the Samadhi, the ecstatic trance in which the
consciousness passes away from outer objects. But all this is really incidental; the one thing essential is the
intense devotion of the thought in the mind to the object of adoration. Although it seems akin to the contemplation
of the way of knowledge, it differs from that in its spirit. It is in its real nature not a still, but an ecstatic
contemplation; it seeks not to pass into the being of the Divine, but to bring the Divine into ourselves and to lose
ourselves in the deep ecstasy of his presence or of his possession; and its bliss is not the peace of unity, but the
ecstasy of union. Here, too, there may be the separative self-consecration which ends in the giving up of all other
thought of life for the possession of this ecstasy, eternal afterwards in planes beyond, or the comprehensive
consecration in which all the thoughts are full of the Divine and even in the occupations
Page 574

of life every thought remembers him. As in the other Yogas, so in this, one comes to see the Divine everywhere
and in all and to pour out the realisation of the Divine in all one's inner activities and outward actions. But all is
supported here by the primary force of the emotional union: for it is by love that the entire self-consecration and
the entire possession is accomplished, and thought and action become shapes and figures of the divine love which
possesses the spirit and its members.
\par This is the ordinary movement by which what may be at first a vague adoration of some idea of the Divine
takes on the hue and character and then, once entered into the path of Yoga, the inner reality and intense
experience of divine love. But there is the more intimate Yoga which from the first consists in this love and
attains only by the intensity of its longing without other process or method. All the rest comes, but it comes out of
this, as leaf and flower out of the seed; other things are not the means of developing and fulfilling love, but the
radiations of love already growing in the soul. This is the way that the soul follows when, while occupied perhaps
with the normal human life, it has heard the flute of the Godhead behind the near screen of secret woodlands and
no longer possesses itself, can have no satisfaction or rest till it has pursued and seized and possessed the divine
fluteplayer. This is in essence the power of love itself in the heart and soul turning from earthly objects to the
spiritual source of all beauty and delight. There live in this seeking all the sentiment and passion, all the moods
and experiences of love concentrated on a supreme object of desire and intensified a hundredfold beyond the
highest acme of intensity possible to a human love. There is the disturbance of the whole life, the illumination by
an unseized vision, the unsatisfied yearning for a single object of the heart's desire, the intense impatience of all
that distracts from the one preoccupation, the intense pain of the obstacles that stand in the way of possession,
the perfect vision of all beauty and delight in a single form. And there are all the many moods of love, the joy of
musing and absorption, the delight of the meeting and fulfilment and embrace, the pain of separation, the wrath of
love, the tears of longing, the increased delight
Page 575

of reunion. The heart is the scene of this supreme idyll of the inner consciousness, but a heart which undergoes
\NH increasingly an intense spiritual change and becomes the radiantly unfolding lotus of the spirit. And as the
intensity of its seeking is beyond the highest power of the normal human emotions, so also the delight and the
final ecstasy are beyond the reach of the imagination and beyond expression by speech. For this is the delight of
the Godhead that passes human understanding.
\par Indian bhakti has given to this divine love powerful forms, poetic symbols which are not in reality so much
symbols as intimate expressions of truth which can find no other expression. It uses human relations and sees a
divine person, not as mere figures, but because there are divine relations of supreme Delight and Beauty with the
human soul of which human relations are the imperfect but still the real type, and because that Delight and
Beauty are not abstractions or qualities of a quite impalpable metaphysical entity, but the very body and form of
the supreme Being. It is a living Soul to which the soul of the bhakta yearns; for the source of all life is not an
idea or a conception or a state of existence, but a real Being. Therefore in the possession of the divine Beloved
all the life of the soul is satisfied and all the relations by which it finds and in which it expresses itself, are wholly
fulfilled; therefore, too, by any and all of them can the Beloved be sought, though those which admit the greatest
intensity, are always those by which he can be most intensely pursued and possessed with the profoundest
ecstasy. He is sought within in the heart and therefore apart from all by an inward-gathered concentration of the
being in the soul itself; but he is also seen and loved everywhere where he manifests his being. All the beauty
and joy of existence is seen as his joy and beauty; he is embraced by the spirit in all beings; the ecstasy of love
enjoyed pours itself out in a universal love; all existence becomes a radiation of its delight and even in its very
appearances is transformed into something other than its outward appearance. The world itself is experienced as
a play of the divine Delight, a Lila, and that in which the world loses itself is the heaven of beatitude of the
eternal union.
Page 576

\par
\hn Chapter V
\par
\ht The Divine Personality
\par\drop One question rises immediately in a synthetic Yoga which must not only comprise but unify knowledge
and devotion, the difficult and troubling question of the divine Personality. All the trend of modern thought has
been towards the belittling of personality; it has seen behind the \NH complex facts of existence only a great
impersonal force, an obscure becoming, and that too works itself out through \NH impersonal forces and
impersonal laws, while personality presents itself only as a subsequent, subordinate, partial, transient phenomenon
upon the face of this impersonal movement. Granting even to this Force a consciousness, that seems to be
impersonal, indeterminate, void in essence of all but abstract qualities or energies; for everything else is only a
result, a minor phenomenon. \NH Ancient Indian thought starting from quite the other end of the scale arrived on
most of its lines at the same generalisation. It conceived of an impersonal existence as the original and eternal
truth; personality is only an illusion or at best a phenomenon of the mind.
\par On the other hand, the way of devotion is impossible if the personality of the Divine cannot be taken as a
reality, a real reality and not a hypostasis of the illusion. There can be no love without a lover and beloved. If our
personality is an illusion and the Personality to whom our adoration rises only a primary aspect of the illusion, and
if we believe that, then love and adoration must at once be killed, or can only survive in the illogical passion of the
heart denying by its strong beats of life the clear and dry truths of the reason. To love and adore a shadow of our
minds or a bright cosmic phenomenon which vanishes from the eye of Truth, may be possible, but the way of
salvation cannot be built upon a foundation of wilful self-deception. The bhakta indeed does not allow these
doubts of the intellect to
Page 577

come in his way; he has the divinations of his heart, and these are to him sufficient. But the sadhaka of the
integral Yoga has to know the eternal and ultimate Truth and not to persist to the end in the delight of a Shadow.
If the impersonal is the sole enduring truth, then a firm synthesis is impossible. He can at most take the divine
personality as a symbol, a powerful and effective fiction, but he will have in the end to overpass it and to abandon
devotion for the sole pursuit of the ultimate knowledge. He will have to empty being of all its symbols, values,
contents in order to arrive at the featureless Reality.
\par We have said, however, that personality and impersonality, as our minds understand them, are only aspects
of the Divine and both are contained in his being; they are one thing which we see from two opposite sides and
into which we enter by two gates. We have to see this more clearly in order to rid ourselves of any doubts with
which the intellect may seek to afflict us as we follow the impulse of devotion and the intuition of love or to
pursue us into the joy of the divine union. They fall away indeed from that joy, but if we are too heavily weighted
with the philosophical mind, they may follow us almost up to its threshold. It is well therefore to discharge
ourselves of them as early as may be by perceiving the limits of the intellect, the rational philosophic mind, in its
peculiar way of approaching the truth and the limits even of the spiritual experience which sets out from the
approach through the intellect, to see that it need not be the whole integrality of the highest and widest spiritual
experience. Spiritual intuition is always a more luminous guide than the discriminating reason, and spiritual
intuition addresses itself to us not only through the reason, but through the rest of our being as well, through the
heart and the life also. The integral knowledge will then be that which takes account of all and unifies their
diverse truths. The intellect itself will be more deeply satisfied if it does not confine itself to its own data, but
accepts truth of the heart and the life also and gives to them their absolute spiritual value.
\par The nature of the philosophical intellect is to move among ideas and to give them a sort of abstract reality of
their own
Page 578

apart from all their concrete representations which affect our life and personal consciousness. Its bent is to
reduce these representations to their barest and most general terms and to subtilise even these if possible into
some final abstraction. The pure intellectual direction travels away from life. In judging things it tries to get back
from their effects on our personality and to arrive at whatever general and impersonal truth may be behind them;
it is inclined to treat that kind of truth as the only real truth of being or at least as the one superior and permanent
power of reality. Therefore it is bound by its own nature to end in its extremes at an absolute impersonality and
an absolute abstraction. This is where the ancient philosophies ended. They reduced everything to three
abstractions, existence, consciousness and bliss of being, and they tended to get rid of the two of these three
which seemed dependent on the first and most abstract, and to throw all back into a pure featureless existence
from which everything else had been discharged, all representations, all values, except the one infinite and
timeless fact of being. But the intellect had still one farther possible step to take and it took it in Buddhistic
philosophy. It found that even this final fact of existence was only a representation; it abstracted that also and got
to an infinite zero which might be either a void or an eternal inexpressible.
\par The heart and life, as we know, have an exactly opposite law. They cannot live with abstractions; they can
find their satisfaction only in things that are concrete or can be made seizable; whether physically, mentally or
spiritually, their object is not something which they seek to discriminate and arrive at by intellectual abstraction; a
living becoming of it or a conscious possession and joy of their object is what they seek. Nor is it the satisfaction
of an abstract mind or impersonal existence to which they respond, but the joy and the activity of a being, a
conscious Person in us, whether finite or infinite, to whom the delights and powers of his existence are a reality.
Therefore when the heart and life turn towards the Highest and the Infinite, they arrive not at an abstract
existence or non-existence, a Sat or else a Nirvana, but at an existent, a Sat Purusha, not merely at a
consciousness,
Page 579

but at a conscious Being, a Chaitanya Purusha, not merely at a purely impersonal delight of the Is, but at an
infinite I Am of bliss, an Anandamaya Purusha; nor can they immerge and lose his consciousness and bliss in
featureless existence, but must insist on all three in one, for delight of existence is their highest power and
without consciousness delight cannot be possessed. That is the sense of the supreme figure of the intensest
Indian religion of love, Sri Krishna, the All-blissful and All-beautiful.
\par The intelligence can also follow this trend, but it ceases then to be the pure intellect; it calls in its power of
imagination to its aid, it becomes the image-maker, the creator of symbols and values, a spiritual artist and poet.
Therefore the severest intellectual philosophy admits the Saguna, the divine Person, only as the supreme cosmic
symbol; go beyond it to reality and you will arrive, it says, at last to the Nirguna, the pure Impersonal. The rival
philosophy asserts the superiority of the Saguna; that which is impersonal is, it will perhaps say, only the material,
the stuff of his spiritual nature out of which he manifests the powers of his being, consciousness and bliss, all that
expresses him; the impersonal is the apparent negative out of which he looses the temporal variations of his
eternal positive of personality. There are evidently here two instincts, or, if we hesitate to apply that word to the
intellect, two innate powers of our being which are dealing each in its own manner with the same Reality.
\par Both the ideas of the intellect, its discriminations, and the \NH aspirations of the heart and life, their
approximations, have \NH behind them realities at which they are the means of arriving. Both are justified by
spiritual experience; both arrive at the divine absolute of that which they are seeking. But still each tends, if too
exclusively indulged, to be hampered by the limitations of its innate quality and its characteristic means. We see
that in our earthly living, where the heart and life followed exclusively failed to lead to any luminous issue, while
an exclusive intellectuality becomes either remote, abstract and impotent or a sterile critic or dry mechanist.
Their sufficient harmony and just reconciliation is one of the great problems of our psychology and our action.
Page 580

\par The reconciling power lies beyond in the intuition. But there is an intuition which serves the intellect and an
intuition which serves the heart and the life, and if we follow either of these exclusively, we shall not get much
farther than before; we shall only make more intimately real to us, but still separately, the things at which the
other and less seeing powers are aiming. But the fact that it can lend itself impartially to all parts of our
being,—for even the body has its intuitions,—shows that the intuition is not exclusive, but an integral truth-finder.
We have to question the intuition of our whole being, not only separately in each part of it, nor in a sum of their
findings, but beyond all these lower instruments, beyond even their first spiritual correspondents, by rising into the
native home of the intuition which is the native home of the infinite and illimitable Truth, \s{\,rtasya sve dame},
where all existence discovers its unity. That is what the ancient Veda meant when it cried, “There is a firm truth
hidden by truth (the eternal truth concealed by this other of which we have here these lower intuitions); there the
ten hundred rays of light stand together; that is One.” \s{\,Rtena \,rtam apihita\.m dhruva\.m}\sdots . . . \s{da\'sa \'sat\=a
saha tasthus, tad ekam.}
\par The spiritual intuition lays hold always upon the reality; it is the luminous harbinger of spiritual realisation or
else its illuminative light; it sees that which the other powers of our being are labouring to explore; it gets at the
firm truth of the abstract representations of the intellect and the phenomenal representations of the heart and life,
a truth which is itself neither remotely abstract nor outwardly concrete, but something else for which these are
only two sides of its psychological manifestation to us. What the intuition of our integral being perceives, when its
members no longer dispute among themselves but are illumined from above, is that the whole of our being aims
at the one reality. The impersonal is a truth, the personal too is a truth; they are the same truth seen from two
sides of our psychological activity; neither by itself gives the total account of the Reality, and yet by either we
can approach it.
\par Looked at from one side, it would seem as if an impersonal Thought were at work and created the fiction of
the
Page 581

thinker for the convenience of its action, an impersonal Power at work \NH creating the fiction of the doer, an
impersonal existence in operation which uses the fiction of a personal being who has a conscious personality and
a personal delight. Looked at from the other side, it is the thinker who expresses himself in thoughts which
without him could not exist and our general notion of thought symbolises simply the power of the nature of the
thinker; the Ishwara expresses himself by will and power and force; the Existent extends himself in all the forms
integral and partial, direct, inverse and perverse of his existence, consciousness and bliss, and our abstract
general notion of these things is only an intellectual representation of the triple power of his nature of being. All
impersonality seems in its turn to become a fiction and existence in its every movement and its every particle
nothing but the life, the consciousness, the power, the delight of the one and yet innumerable Personality, the
infinite Godhead, the self-aware and self-unfolding Purusha. Both views are true, except that the idea of fiction,
which is borrowed from our own intellectual processes, has to be exiled and each must be given its proper
validity. The integral seeker has to see in this light that he can reach one and the same Reality on both lines,
either successively or simultaneously, as if on two connected wheels travelling on parallel lines, but parallel lines
which in defiance of intellectual logic but in obedience to their own inner truth of unity do meet in infinity.
\par We have to look at the divine Personality from this standpoint. When we speak of personality, we mean by it
at first something limited, external and separative, and our idea of a personal God assumes the same imperfect
character. Our personality is to us at first a separate creature, a limited mind, body, character which we conceive
of as the person we are, a fixed quantity; for although in reality it is always changing, yet there is a sufficient
element of stability to give a kind of practical justification to this notion of fixedness. We conceive of God as such
a person, only without body, a separate person different from all others with a mind and character limited by
certain qualities. At first in our primitive conceptions his deity is a thing
Page 582

of much inconstancy, freak and caprice, an enlarged edition of our human character; but afterwards we conceive
of the divine nature of personality as a quite fixed quantity and we attribute to it those qualities alone which we
regard as divine and ideal, while all the others are eliminated. This limitation compels us to account for all the rest
by attributing them to a Devil, or by lending to man an original creative capacity for all that we consider evil, or
else, when we perceive that this will not quite do, by erecting a power which we call Nature and attributing to
that all the lower quality and mass of action for which we do not wish to make the Divine responsible. At a
higher pitch the attribution of mind and character to God becomes less anthropomorphic and we regard him as an
infinite Spirit, but still a separate person, a spirit with certain fixed divine qualities as his attributes. So are
conceived the ideas of the divine Personality, the personal God which vary so much in various religions.
\par All this may seem at first sight to be an original anthropomorphism terminating in an intellectual notion of the
Deity which is very much at variance with the actualities of the world as we see it. It is not surprising that the
philosophical and sceptical mind should have found little difficulty in destroying it all intellectually, whether in the
direction of the denial of a personal God and the assertion of an impersonal Force or Becoming or in that of an
impersonal Being or an ineffable denial of existence with all the rest as only symbols of Maya or phenomenal
truths of the Time-consciousness. But these are only the personifications of monotheism. Polytheistic religions,
less exalted perhaps, but wider and more sensitive in their \NH response to cosmic life, have felt that all in the
cosmos has a divine origin; therefore they conceived of the existence of many divine personalities with a vague
sense of an indefinable Divine behind, whose relations with the personal gods were not very clearly conceived.
And in their more exoteric forms these gods were crudely \NH anthropomorphic; but where the inner sense of
spiritual things became clearer, the various godheads assumed the appearance of personalities of the one
Divine,—that is the declared point of view of the ancient Veda. This Divine might be a supreme
Page 583

Being who manifests himself in various divine personalities or an impersonal existence which meets the human
mind in these forms; or both views might be held simultaneously without any intellectual attempt to reconcile
them, since both were felt to be true to spiritual experience.
\par If we subject these notions of the divine Personality to the discrimination of the intellect, we shall be inclined
to reduce them, according to our bent, to fictions of the imagination or to psychological symbols, in any case, the
response of our sensitive personality to something which is not this at all, but is purely impersonal. We may say
that That is in reality the very opposite of our humanity and our personality and therefore in order to enter into
relations with it we are impelled to set up these human fictions and these personal symbols so as to make it
nearer to us. But we have to judge by spiritual experience, and in a total spiritual experience we shall find that
these things are not fictions and symbols, but truths of divine being in their essence, however imperfect may have
been our representations of them. Even our first idea of our own personality is not an absolute error, but only an
incomplete and superficial view beset by many mental errors. Greater self-knowledge shows us that we are not
fundamentally the particular formulation of form, powers, properties, qualities with a conscious I identifying itself
with them, which we at first appear to be. That is only a temporary fact, though still a fact, of our partial being on
the surface of our active consciousness. We find within an infinite being with the potentiality of all qualities, of
infinite quality, \s{ananta-gu\,na}, which can be combined in any number of possible ways, and each combination
is a revelation of our being. For all this personality is the self-manifestation of a Person, that is to say of a being
who is conscious of his manifestation.
\par But we see too that this being does not seem to be composed even of infinite quality, but has a status of his
complex reality in which he seems to stand back from it and to become an indefinable conscious existence,
\s{anirde\'syam}. Even consciousness seems to be drawn back and leave merely a timeless pure existence. And
again even this pure self of our being seems at a certain
Page 584

pitch to deny its own reality, or to be a projection from a self-less
\note{\s{an\=atmyam anilayanam}. Taittiriya Upanishad.} baseless unknowable, which we may conceive of either
as a nameless somewhat, or as a Nihil. It is when we would fix upon this exclusively and forget all that it has
withdrawn into itself that we speak of pure impersonality or the void Nihil as the highest truth. But a more
integral vision shows us that it is the Person and the personality and all that it had manifested which has thus cast
itself upward into its own unexpressed absolute. And if we carry up our heart as well as our reasoning mind to
the Highest, we shall find that we can reach it through the absolute Person as well as through an \NH absolute
impersonality. But all this self-knowledge is only the type within ourselves of the corresponding truth of the
Divine in his universality. There too we meet him in various forms of divine personality; in formulations of quality
which variously express him to us in his nature; in infinite quality, the Ananta-guna; in the divine Person who
expresses himself through infinite quality; in absolute \NH impersonality, an absolute existence or an absolute
non-existence, which is yet all the time the unexpressed Absolute of this divine Person, this conscious Being who
manifests himself through us and through the universe.
\par Even on the cosmic plane we are constantly approaching the Divine on either of these sides. We may think,
feel and say that God is Truth, Justice, Righteousness, Power, Love, Delight, Beauty; we may see him as a
universal force or as a universal consciousness. But this is only the abstract way of experience. As we ourselves
are not merely a number of qualities or powers or a psychological quantity, but a being, a person who so
expresses his nature, so is the Divine a Person, a conscious Being who thus expresses his nature to us. And we
can adore him through different forms of this nature, a God of righteousness, a God of love and mercy, a God of
peace and purity; but it is evident that there are other things in the divine nature which we have put outside the
form of personality in which we are thus worshipping him. The courage of an unflinching spiritual vision and
experience
Page 585

can meet him also in more severe or in terrible forms. None of these are all the Divinity; yet these forms of his
personality are real truths of himself in which he meets us and seems to deal with us, as if the rest had been put
away behind him. He is each separately and all altogether. He is Vishnu, Krishna, Kali; he reveals himself to us
in humanity as the Christ personality or the Buddha personality. When we look beyond our first exclusively
concentrated vision, we see behind Vishnu all the personality of Shiva and behind Shiva all the personality of
Vishnu. He is the Ananta-guna, infinite quality and the infinite divine Personality which manifests itself through it.
Again he seems to withdraw into a pure spiritual impersonality or beyond all idea even of impersonal Self and to
justify a spiritualised atheism or agnosticism; he becomes to the mind of man an indefinable, \s{anirde\'syam}. But
out of this unknowable the conscious Being, the divine Person, who has manifested himself here, still speaks,
“This too is I; even here beyond the view of mind, I am He, the Purushottama.”
\par For beyond the divisions and contradictions of the intellect there is another light and there the vision of a
truth reveals itself which we may thus try to express to ourselves intellectually. There all is one truth of all these
truths; for there each is present and justified in all the rest. In that light our spiritual experience becomes united
and integralised; no least hair's breadth of real division is left, no shade of superiority and inferiority remains
between the seeking of the Impersonal and the adoration of the divine Personality, between the way of
knowledge and the way of devotion.
Page 586

\par
\hn Chapter VI
\par
\ht The Delight of the Divine
\par\drop This then is the way of devotion and this its justification to the highest and the widest, the most integral
knowledge, and we can now perceive what form and place it will take in an integral Yoga. Yoga is in essence
the union of the soul with the immortal being and consciousness and delight of the Divine, effected through the
human nature with a result of development into the divine nature of being, whatever that may be, so far as we
can conceive it in mind and realise it in spiritual activity. Whatever we see of this Divine and fix our concentrated
effort upon it, that we can become or grow into some kind of unity with it or at the lowest into tune and harmony
with it. The old Upanishad put it trenchantly in its highest terms, “Whoever envisages it as the Existence
becomes that existence and whoever envisages it as the Non-existence, becomes that non-existence;” so too it is
with all else that we see of the Divine,—that, we may say, is at once the essential and the pragmatic truth of the
Godhead. It is something beyond us which is indeed already within us, but which we as yet are not or are only
initially in our human existence; but whatever of it we see, we can create or reveal in our conscious nature and
being and can grow into it, and so to create or reveal in ourselves individually the Godhead and grow into its
universality and transcendence is our spiritual destiny. Or if this seem too high for the weakness of our nature,
then at least to approach, reflect and be in secure communion with it is a near and possible consummation.
\par The aim of this synthetic or integral Yoga which we are considering, is union with the being, consciousness
and delight of the Divine through every part of our human nature separately or simultaneously, but all in the long
end harmonised and unified, so that the whole may be transformed into a divine nature of being. Nothing less
than this can satisfy the integral seer, because
Page 587

what he sees must be that which he strives to possess spiritually and, so far as may be, become. Not with the
knower in him alone, nor with the will alone, nor with the heart alone, but with all these equally and also with the
whole mental and vital being in him he aspires to the Godhead and labours to convert their nature into its divine
equivalents. And since God meets us in many ways of his being and in all tempts us to him even while he seems
to elude us,—and to see divine possibility and overcome its play of obstacles constitutes the whole mystery and
greatness of human existence,—therefore in each of these ways at its highest or in the union of all, if we can
find the key of their oneness, we shall aspire to track out and find and possess him. Since he withdraws into
impersonality, we follow after his impersonal being and delight, but since he meets us also in our personality and
through personal relations of the Divine with the human, that too we shall not deny ourselves; we shall admit both
the play of the love and the delight and its ineffable union.
\par By knowledge we seek unity with the Divine in his conscious being: by works we seek also unity with the
Divine in his conscious being, not statically, but dynamically, through conscious union with the divine Will; but by
love we seek unity with him in all the delight of his being. For that reason the way of love, however narrow it
may seem in some of its first movements, is in the end more imperatively all-embracing than any other motive of
Yoga. The way of knowledge tends easily towards the impersonal and the absolute, may very soon become
exclusive. It is true that it need not do so; since the conscious being of the Divine is universal and individual as
well as transcendent and absolute, here too there may be and should be a tendency to integral realisation of unity
and we can arrive by it at a spiritual oneness with God in man and God in the universe not less complete than any
transcendent union. But still this is not quite imperative. For we may plead that there is a higher and a lower
knowledge, a higher self-awareness and a lower self-awareness, and that here the apex of knowledge is to be
pursued to the exclusion of the mass of knowledge, the way of exclusion preferred to the integral way. Or we
may discover a theory of illusion to justify
Page 588

our rejection of all connection with our fellow-men and with the cosmic action. The way of works leads us to the
Transcendent whose power of being manifests itself as a will in the world one in us and all, by identity with
which we come, owing to the conditions of that identity, into union with him as the one self in all and as the
universal self and Lord in the cosmos. And this might seem to impose a certain comprehensiveness in our
realisation of the unity. But still this too is not quite imperative. For this motive also may lean towards an entire
impersonality and, even if it leads to a continued participation in the activities of the universal Godhead, may be
entirely detached and passive in its principle. It is only when delight intervenes that the motive of integral union
becomes quite imperative.
\par This delight which is so entirely imperative, is the delight in the Divine for his own sake and for nothing else,
for no cause or gain whatever beyond itself. It does not seek God for anything that he can give us or for any
particular quality in him, but simply and purely because he is our self and our whole being and our all. It
embraces the delight of the transcendence, not for the sake of transcendence, but because he is the
transcendent; the delight of the universal, not for the sake of universality, but because he is the universal; the
delight of the individual not for the sake of individual satisfaction, but because he is the individual. It goes behind
all distinctions and appearances and makes no calculations of more or less in his being, but \NH embraces him
wherever he is and therefore everywhere, embraces him utterly in the seeming less as in the seeming more, in
the apparent limitation as in the revelation of the illimitable; it has the intuition and the experience of his oneness
and completeness everywhere. To seek after him for the sake of his absolute being alone is really to drive at our
own individual gain, the gain of absolute peace. To possess him absolutely indeed is necessarily the aim of this
delight in his being, but this comes when we possess him utterly and are utterly possessed by him and need be
limited to no particular status or condition. To seek after him in some heaven of bliss is to seek him not for
himself, but for the bliss of heaven; when we have all the true delight of his being,
Page 589

then heaven is within ourselves, and wherever he is and we are, there we have the joy of his kingdom. So too to
seek him only in ourselves and for ourselves, is to limit both ourselves and our joy in him. The integral delight
embraces him not only within our own individual being, but equally in all men and in all beings. And because in
him we are one with all, it seeks him not only for ourselves, but for all our fellows. A perfect and complete
delight in the Divine, perfect because pure and self-existent, complete because all-embracing as well as
all-absorbing, is the meaning of the way of Bhakti for the seeker of the integral Yoga.
\par Once it is active in us, all other ways of Yoga convert themselves, as it were, to its law and find by it their
own richest significance. This integral devotion of our being to God does not turn away from knowledge; the
bhakta of this path is the God-lover who is also the God-knower, because by knowledge of his being comes the
whole delight of his being; but it is in delight that knowledge fulfils itself, the knowledge of the transcendent in the
delight of the Transcendent, the knowledge of the universal in the delight of the universal Godhead, the
knowledge of the individual manifestation in the delight of God in the individual, the knowledge of the impersonal
in the pure delight of his impersonal being, the knowledge of the personal in the full delight of his personality, the
knowledge of his qualities and their play in the delight of the manifestation, the knowledge of the quality-less in
the delight of his colourless existence and non-manifestation.
\par So too this God-lover will be the divine worker, not for the sake of works or for a self-regarding pleasure in
action, but because in this way God expends the power of his being and in his powers and their signs we find
him, because the divine Will in works is the outflowing of the Godhead in the delight of its power, of divine Being
in the delight of divine Force. He will feel perfect joy in the works and acts of the Beloved, because in them too
he finds the Beloved; he will himself do all works because through those works too the Lord of his being
expresses his divine joy in him: when he works, he feels that he is expressing in act and power his oneness with
that which he loves and adores;
Page 590

he feels the rapture of the will which he obeys and with which all the force of his being is blissfully identified. So
too, again, this God-lover will seek after perfection, because perfection is the nature of the Divine and the more
he grows into perfection, the more he feels the Beloved manifest in his natural being. Or he will simply grow in
perfection like the blossoming of a flower because the Divine is in him and the joy of the Divine, and as that joy
expands in him, soul and mind and life too expand naturally into their godhead. At the same time, because he
feels the Divine in all, perfect within every limiting appearance, he will not have the sorrow of his imperfection.
\par Nor will the seeking of the Divine through life and the meeting of him in all the activities of his being and of
the universal being be absent from the scope of his worship. All Nature and all life will be to him at once a
revelation and a fine trysting-place. Intellectual and aesthetic and dynamic activities, science and philosophy and
life, thought and art and action will assume for him a diviner sanction and a greater meaning. He will seek them
because of his clear sight of the Divine through them and because of the delight of the Divine in them. He will
not be indeed attached to their appearances, for attachment is an obstacle to the Ananda; but because he
possesses that pure, powerful and perfect Ananda which obtains everything but is dependent on nothing, and
because he finds in them the ways and acts and signs, the becomings and the symbols and images of the
Beloved, he draws from them a rapture which the normal mind that pursues them for themselves cannot attain or
even dream. All this and more becomes part of the integral way and its consummation.
\par The general power of Delight is love and the special mould which the joy of love takes is the vision of
beauty. The God-lover is the universal lover and he embraces the All-blissful and All-beautiful. When universal
love has seized on his heart, it is the decisive sign that the Divine has taken possession of him; and when he has
the vision of the All-beautiful everywhere and can feel at all times the bliss of his embrace, that is the decisive
sign that he has taken possession of the Divine. Union is the
Page 591

consummation of love, but it is this mutual possession that gives it at once the acme and the largest reach of its
intensity. It is the foundation of oneness in ecstasy.
Page 592

\par
\hn Chapter VII
\par
\ht The Ananda Brahman
\par\drop The way of devotion in the integral synthetic Yoga will take the form of a seeking after the Divine
through love and delight and a seizing with joy on all the ways of his being. It will find its acme in a perfect union
of love and a perfect enjoyment of all the ways of the soul's intimacy with God. It may start from knowledge or it
may start from works, but it will then turn knowledge into a joy of luminous union with the being of the Beloved
and turn works into a joy of the active union of our being with the will and the power of being of the Beloved. Or
it may start directly from love and delight; it will then take both these other things into itself and will develop them
as part of the complete joy of oneness.
\par The beginning of the heart's attraction to the Divine may be impersonal, the touch of an impersonal joy in
something universal or transcendent that has revealed itself directly or indirectly to our emotional or our aesthetic
being or to our capacity of spiritual felicity. That which we thus grow aware of is the Ananda Brahman, the bliss
existence. There is an adoration of an impersonal Delight and Beauty, of a pure and an infinite perfection to
which we can give no name or form, a moved attraction of the soul to some ideal and infinite Presence, Power,
existence in the world or beyond it, which in some way becomes psychologically or spiritually sensible to us and
then more and more intimate and real. That is the call, the touch of the bliss existence upon us. Then to have
always the joy and nearness of its presence, to know what it is, so as to satisfy the intellect and the intuitional
mind of its constant reality, to put our passive and, so far as we can manage it, our active, our inner immortal and
even our outer mortal being into perfect harmony with it, grow into a necessity of our living. And to open
ourselves to it is what we feel to be the one true happiness, to live into it the sole real perfection.
Page 593

\par A transcendent Bliss, unimaginable and inexpressible by the mind and speech, is the nature of the Ineffable.
That broods immanent and secret in the whole universe and in everything in the universe. Its presence is
described as a secret ether of the bliss of being, of which the Scripture says that, if this were not, none could for
a moment breathe or live. And this spiritual bliss is here also in our hearts. It is hidden in from the toil of the
surface mind which catches only at weak and flawed translations of it into various mental, vital and physical
forms of the joy of existence. But if the mind has once grown sufficiently subtle and pure in its receptions and
not limited by the grosser nature of our outward responses to existence, we can take a reflection of it which will
wear perhaps wholly or predominantly the hue of whatever is strongest in our nature. It may present itself first
as a yearning for some universal Beauty which we feel in Nature and man and in all that is around us; or we
may have the intuition of some transcendent Beauty of which all apparent beauty here is only a symbol. That is
how it may come to those in whom the aesthetic being is developed and insistent and the instincts which, when
they find form of expression, make the poet and artist, are predominant. Or it may be the sense of a divine spirit
of love or else a helpful and compassionate infinite Presence in the universe or behind or beyond it which
responds to us when we turn the need of our spirit towards it. So it may first show itself when the emotional
being is intensely developed. It may come near to us in other ways, but always as a Power or Presence of
delight, beauty, love or peace which touches the mind, but is beyond the forms these things take ordinarily in the
mind.
\par For all joy, beauty, love, peace, delight are outflowings from the Ananda Brahman,—all delight of the spirit,
the intellect, the imagination, aesthetic sense, ethical aspiration and satisfaction, action, life, the body. And
through all ways of our being the Divine can touch us and make use of them to awaken and liberate the spirit.
But to reach the Ananda Brahman in itself the mental reception of it must be subtilised, spiritualised,
universalised, discharged of everything that is turbid and limiting. For when we draw quite near or enter into it, it
is by an awakened
Page 594

spiritual sense of a transcendent and a universal Delight which exists within and yet behind and beyond the
contradictions of the world and to which we can unite ourselves through a growing universal and spiritual or a
transcendental ecstasy.
\par Ordinarily, the mind is satisfied with reflecting this Infinity we perceive or with feeling the sense of it within
and without us, as an experience which, however frequent, yet remains \NH exceptional. It seems in itself so
satisfying and wonderful when it comes and our ordinary mind and the active life which we have to lead may
seem to us so incompatible with it, that we may think it excessive to expect anything more. But the very spirit of
Yoga is this, to make the exceptional normal, and to turn that which is above us and greater than our normal
selves into our own constant consciousness. Therefore we should not hesitate to open ourselves more steadily to
whatever experience of the Infinite we have, to purify and intensify it, to make it our object of constant thought
and contemplation, till it becomes the originating power that acts in us, the Godhead we adore and embrace, our
whole being is put into tune with it and it is made the very self of our being.
\par Our experience of it has to be purified of any mental alloy in it, otherwise it departs, we cannot hold it. And
part of this purification is that it shall cease to be dependent on any cause or exciting condition of mind; it must
become its own cause and self-existent, source of all other delight, which will exist only by it, and not attached to
any cosmic or other image or symbol through which we first came into contact with it. Our experience of it has
to be constantly intensified and made more concentrated; otherwise we shall only reflect it in the mirror of the
imperfect mind and not reach that point of uplifting and transfiguration by which we are carried beyond the mind
into the ineffable bliss. Object of our constant thought and contemplation, it will turn all that is into itself, reveal
itself as the universal Ananda Brahman and make all existence its outpouring. If we wait upon it for the
inspiration of all our inner and our outer acts, it will become the joy of the Divine pouring itself through us in light
and love and power on life and all that lives. Sought
Page 595

by the adoration and love of the soul, it reveals itself as the Godhead, we see in it the face of God and know the
bliss of our Lover. Tuning our whole being to it, we grow into a happy perfection of likeness to it, a human
rendering of the divine nature. And when it becomes in every way the self of our self, we are fulfilled in being
and we bear the plenitude.
\par Brahman always reveals himself to us in three ways, within ourselves, above our plane, around us in the
universe. Within us, there are two centres of the Purusha, the inner Soul through which he touches us to our
awakening; there is the Purusha in the lotus of the heart which opens upward all our powers and the Purusha in
the thousand-petalled lotus whence descend through the thought and will, opening the third eye in us, the
lightnings of vision and the fire of the divine energy. The bliss existence may come to us through either one of
these centres. When the lotus of the heart breaks open, we feel a divine joy, love and peace expanding in us like
a flower of light which irradiates the whole being. They can then unite themselves with their secret source, the
Divine in our hearts, and adore him as in a temple; they can flow upwards to take possession of the thought and
the will and break out upward towards the Transcendent; they stream out in thought and feeling and act towards
all that is around us. But so long as our normal being offers any obstacle or is not wholly moulded into a response
to this divine influence or an instrument of this divine possession, the experience will be intermittent and we may
fall back constantly into our old mortal heart; but by repetition, \s{abhy\=asa}, or by the force of our desire and
adoration of the Divine, it will be progressively remoulded until this abnormal experience becomes our natural
consciousness.
\par When the other upper lotus opens, the whole mind becomes full of a divine light, joy and power, behind
which is the Divine, the Lord of our being on his throne with our soul beside him or drawn inward into his rays;
all the thought and will become then a luminosity, power and ecstasy; in communication with the Transcendent,
this can pour down towards our mortal members and flow by them outwards on the world. In this dawn too there
Page 596

are, as the Vedic mystics knew, our alternations of its day and night, our exiles from the light; but as we grow in
the power to hold this new existence, we become able to look long on the sun from which this irradiation
proceeds and in our inner being we can grow one body with it. Sometimes the rapidity of this change depends on
the strength of our longing for the Divine thus revealed, and on the intensity of our force of seeking; but at others
it proceeds rather by a passive surrender to the rhythms of his all-wise working which acts always by its own at
first inscrutable method. But the latter becomes the foundation when our love and trust are complete and our
whole being lies in the clasp of a Power that is perfect love and wisdom.
\par The Divine reveals himself in the world around us when we look upon that with a spiritual desire of delight
that seeks him in all things. There is often a sudden opening by which the veil of forms is itself turned into a
revelation. A universal spiritual Presence, a universal peace, a universal infinite Delight has manifested,
immanent, embracing, all-penetrating. This Presence by our love of it, our delight in it, our constant thought of it
returns and grows upon us; it becomes the thing that we see and all else is only its habitation, form and symbol.
Even all that is most outward, the body, the form, the sound, whatever our senses seize, are seen as this
Presence; they cease to be physical and are changed into a substance of spirit. This transformation means a
transformation of our own inner consciousness; we are taken by the surrounding Presence into itself and we
become part of it. Our own mind, life, body become to us only its habitation and temple, a form of its working and
an instrument of its self-expression. All is only soul and body of this delight.
\par This is the Divine seen around us and on our own physical plane. But he may reveal himself above. We see
or feel him as a high-uplifted Presence, a great infinite of Ananda above us,—or in it, our Father in heaven,—and
do not feel or see him in ourselves or around us. So long as we keep this vision, the mortality in us is quelled by
that Immortality; it feels the light, power and joy and responds to it according to its capacity; or it feels the
descent of the spirit and it is then for a time
Page 597

transformed or else uplifted into some lustre of reflection of the light and power; it becomes a vessel of the
Ananda. But at other times it lapses into the old mortality and exists or works dully or pettily in the ruck of its
earthly habits. The complete redemption comes by the descent of the divine Power into the human mind and
body and the remoulding of their inner life into the divine image,—what the Vedic seers called the birth of the
Son by the sacrifice. It is in fact by a continual sacrifice or offering, a sacrifice of adoration and aspiration, of
works, of thought and knowledge, of the mounting flame of the Godward will that we build ourselves into the
being of this Infinite.
\par When we possess firmly this consciousness of the Ananda Brahman in all of these three manifestations,
above, within, around, we have the full oneness of it and embrace all existences in its delight, peace, joy and love;
then all the worlds become the body of this self. But we have not the richest knowledge of this Ananda if it is
only an impersonal presence, largeness or immanence that we feel, if our adoration has not been intimate enough
for this Being to reveal to us out of its wide-extended joy the face and body and make us feel the hands of the
Friend and Lover. Its impersonality is the blissful greatness of the Brahman, but from that can look out upon us
the sweetness and intimate control of the divine Personality. For Ananda is the presence of the Self and Master
of our being and the stream of its outflowing can be the pure joy of his Lila.
Page 598

\par
\hn Chapter VIII
\par
\ht The Mystery of Love
\par\drop The adoration of the impersonal Divine would not be strictly a Yoga of devotion according to the
current interpretation; for in the current forms of Yoga it is supposed that the Impersonal can only be sought for
a complete unity in which God and our own person disappear and there is none to adore or to be adored; only the
delight of the experience of oneness and infinity remains. But in truth the miracles of spiritual consciousness are
not to be subjected to so rigid a logic. When we first come to feel the presence of the infinite, as it is the finite
personality in us which is touched by it, that may well answer to the touch and call with a sort of adoration.
Secondly, we may regard the Infinite not so much as a spiritual status of oneness and bliss, or that only as its
mould and medium of being, but rather as the presence of the ineffable Godhead to our consciousness, and then
too love and adoration find their place. And even when our personality seems to disappear into unity with it, it
may still be—and really is—the individual divine who is melting to the universal or the supreme by a union in
which love and lover and loved are forgotten in a fusing experience of ecstasy, but are still there latent in the
oneness and subconsciently persisting in it. All union of the self by love must necessarily be of this nature. We
may even say, in a sense, that it is to have this joy of union as the ultimate crown of all the varied experiences of
spiritual relation between the individual soul and God that the One became many in the universe.
\par Still, the more varied and most intimate experience of divine love cannot come by the pursuit of the
impersonal Infinite alone; for that the Godhead we adore must become near and personal to us. It is possible for
the Impersonal to reveal within itself all the riches of personality when we get into its heart, and one who sought
only to enter into or to embrace the infinite Presence
Page 599

alone, may discover in it things he had not dreamed of; the being of the Divine has surprises for us which
confound the ideas of the limiting intellect. But ordinarily the way of devotion begins from the other end; it starts
from and it rises and widens to its issue by adoration of the divine Personality. The Divine is a Being and not an
abstract existence or a status of pure timeless infinity; the original and universal existence is He, but that
existence is inseparable from consciousness and bliss of being, and an existence conscious of its own being and
its own bliss is what we may well call a divine infinite Person,—Purusha. Moreover all consciousness implies
power, Shakti; where there is infinite consciousness of being, there is infinite power of being, and by that power
all exists in the universe. All beings exist by this Being; all things are the faces of God; all thought and action and
feeling and love proceed from him and return to him, all their results have him for source and support and secret
goal. It is to this Godhead, this Being that the Bhakti of an integral Yoga will be poured out and uplifted.
Transcendent, it will seek him in the ecstasy of an absolute union; universal, it will seek him in infinite quality and
every aspect and in all beings with a universal delight and love; individual, it will enter into all human relations
with him that love creates between person and person.
\par It may not be possible to seize from the beginning on all the complete integrality of that which the heart is
seeking; in fact, it is only possible if the intelligence, the temperament, the emotional mind have already been
developed into largeness and fineness by the trend of our previous living. That is what the experience of the
normal life is meant to lead to by its widening culture of the intellect, the aesthetic and emotional mind and of our
parts too of will and active experience. It widens and refines the normal being so that it may open easily to all the
truth of That which was preparing it for the temple of its self-manifestation. Ordinarily, man is limited in all these
parts of his being and he can grasp at first only so much of the divine truth as has some large correspondence to
his own nature and its past development and associations. Therefore God meets us
Page 600

first in different limited affirmations of his divine qualities and nature; he presents himself to the seeker as an
absolute of the things he can understand and to which his will and heart can respond; he discloses some name
and aspect of his Godhead. This is what is called in Yoga the \s{i\,s\,ta-devat\=a}, the name and form elected by our
nature for its worship. In order that the human being may embrace this Godhead with every part of himself, it is
represented with a form that answers to its aspects and qualities and which becomes the living body of God to
the adorer. These are those forms of Vishnu, Shiva, Krishna, Kali, Durga, Christ, Buddha, which the mind of
man seizes on for adoration. Even the monotheist who worships a formless Godhead, yet gives to him some form
of quality, some mental form or form of Nature by which he envisages and approaches him. But to be able to see
a living form, a mental body, as it were, of the Divine gives to the approach a greater closeness and sweetness.
\par The way of the integral Yoga of bhakti will be to universalise this conception of the Deity, to personalise him
intimately by a multiple and an all-embracing relation, to make him constantly present to all the being and to
devote, give up, surrender the whole being to him, so that he shall dwell near to us and in us and we with him and
in him. \s{Manana} and \s{dar\'sana}, a constant thinking of him in all things and seeing of him always and
everywhere is essential to this way of devotion. When we look on the things of physical Nature, in them we have
to see the divine object of our love; when we look upon men and beings, we have to see him in them and in our
relation with them to see that we are entering into relations with forms of him; when breaking beyond the
limitation of the material world we know or have relations with the beings of other planes, still the same thought
and vision has to be made real to our minds. The normal habit of our minds which are open only to the material
and apparent form and the ordinary mutilated relation and ignore the secret Godhead within, has to yield by an
unceasing habit of all-embracing love and delight to this deeper and ampler comprehension and this greater
relation. In all godheads we have to see this one God whom we worship with our heart and all our
Page 601

being; they are forms of his divinity. So enlarging our spiritual embrace we reach a point at which all is he and
the delight of this consciousness becomes to us our normal uninterrupted way of looking at the world. That brings
us the outward or objective universality of our union with him.
\par Inwardly, the image of the Beloved has to become visible to the eye within, dwelling in us as in his mansion,
informing our hearts with the sweetness of his presence, presiding over all our activities of mind and life as the
friend, master and lover from the summit of our being, uniting us from above with himself in the universe. A
constant inner communion is the joy to be made close and permanent and unfailing. This communion is not to be
confined to an exceptional nearness and adoration when we \NH retire quite into ourselves away from our
normal preoccupations, nor is it to be sought by a putting away of our human activities. All our thoughts,
impulses, feelings, actions have to be referred to him for his sanction or disallowance, or if we cannot yet reach
this point, to be offered to him in our sacrifice of aspiration, so that he may more and more descend into us and
be present in them all and pervade them with all his will and power, his light and knowledge, his love and delight.
In the end all our thoughts, feelings, impulses, actions will begin to proceed from him and change into some divine
seed and form of themselves; in our whole inner living we shall have grown conscious of ourselves as a part of
his being till between the existence of the Divine whom we adore and our own lives there is no longer any
division. So too in all happenings we have to come to see the dealings with us of the divine Lover and take such
pleasure in them that even grief and suffering and physical pain become his gifts and turn to delight and
disappear finally into delight, slain by the sense of the divine contact, because the touch of his hands is the
alchemist of a miraculous transformation. Some reject life because it is tainted with grief and pain, but to the
God-lover grief and pain become means of meeting with him, imprints of his pressure and finally cease as soon
as our union with his nature becomes too complete for these masks of the universal delight at all to conceal it.
They change into the Ananda.
Page 602

\par All the relations by which this union comes about, become on this path intensely and blissfully personal. That
which in the end contains, takes up or unifies them all, is the relation of lover and beloved, because that is the
most intense and blissful of all and carries up all the rest into its heights and yet exceeds them. He is the teacher
and guide and leads us to knowledge; at every step of the developing inner light and vision, we feel his touch like
that of the artist moulding our clay of mind, his voice revealing the truth and its word, the thought he gives us to
which we respond, the flashing of his spears of lightning which chase the darkness of our ignorance. Especially,
in proportion as the partial lights of the mind become transformed into lights of gnosis, in whatever slighter or
greater degree that may happen, we feel it as a transformation of our mentality into his and more and more he
becomes the thinker and seer in us. We cease to think and see for ourselves, but think only what he wills to think
for us and see only what he sees for us. And then the teacher is fulfilled in the lover; he lays hands on all our
mental being to embrace and possess, to enjoy and use it.
\par He is the Master; but in this way of approach all distance and separation, all awe and fear and mere
obedience disappear, because we become too close and united with him for these things to endure and it is the
lover of our being who takes it up and occupies and uses and does with it whatever he wills. Obedience is the
sign of the servant, but that is the lowest stage of this relation, \s{d\=asya}. Afterwards we do not obey, but move
to his will as the string replies to the finger of the musician. To be the instrument is this higher stage of
self-surrender and submission. But this is the living and loving instrument and it ends in the whole nature of our
being becoming the slave of God, rejoicing in his possession and its own blissful subjection to the divine grasp and
mastery. With a passionate delight it does all he wills it to do without questioning and bears all he would have it
bear, because what it bears is the burden of the beloved being.
\par He is the friend, the adviser, helper, saviour in trouble and distress, the defender from enemies, the hero who
fights our
Page 603

battles for us or under whose shield we fight, the charioteer, the pilot of our ways. And here we come at once to
a closer intimacy; he is the comrade and eternal companion, the playmate of the game of living. But still there is
so far a certain division, however pleasant, and friendship is too much limited by the appearance of beneficence.
The lover can wound, abandon, be wroth with us, seem to betray, yet our love endures and even grows by these
oppositions; they increase the joy of reunion and the joy of possession; through them the lover remains the friend,
and all that he does we find in the end has been done by the lover and helper of our being for our soul's
perfection as well as for his joy in us. These contradictions lead to a greater intimacy. He is the father and
mother too of our being, its source and protector and its indulgent cherisher and giver of our desires. He is the
child born to our desire whom we cherish and rear. All these things the lover takes up; his love in its intimacy and
oneness keeps in it the paternal and maternal care and lends itself to our demands upon it. All is unified in that
deepest many-sided relation.
\par From the beginning even it is possible to have this closest \NH relation of the lover and beloved, but it will
not be as exclusive for the integral Yogin as for certain purely ecstatic ways of Bhakti. It will from the beginning
take into itself something of the hues of the other relations, since he follows too knowledge and works and has
need of the Divine as teacher, friend and master. The growing of the love of God must carry with it in him an
expansion of the knowledge of God and of the action of the divine Will in his nature and living. The divine Lover
reveals himself; he takes possession of the life. But still the essential relation will be that of love from which all
things flow, love passionate, complete, seeking a hundred ways of fulfilment, every means of mutual possession,
a million facets of the joy of union. All the distinctions of the mind, all its barriers and “cannot be”s, all the cold
analyses of the reason are mocked at by this love or they are only used as the tests and fields and gates of union.
Love comes to us in many ways; it may come as an awakening to the beauty of the Lover, by the sight of an
ideal face and image of him, by his mysterious hints to us of himself behind
Page 604

the thousand faces of things in the world, by a slow or sudden need of the heart, by a vague thirst in the soul, by
the sense of someone near us drawing us or pursuing us with love or of someone blissful and beautiful whom we
must discover.
\par We may seek after him passionately and pursue the unseen beloved; but also the lover whom we think not
of, may pursue us, may come upon us in the midst of the world and seize on us for his own whether at first we
will or no. Even, he may come to us at first as an enemy, with the wrath of love, and our earliest relations with
him may be those of battle and struggle. Where first there is love and attraction, the relations between the Divine
and the soul may still for long be chequered with misunderstanding and offence, jealousy and wrath, strife and
the quarrels of love, hope and despair and the pain of absence and separation. We throw up all the passions of
the heart against him, till they are purified into a sole ecstasy of bliss and oneness. But that too is no monotony; it
is not possible for the tongue of human speech to tell all the utter unity and all the eternal variety of the ananda of
divine love. Our higher and our lower members are both flooded with it, the mind and life no less than the soul:
even the physical body takes its share of the joy, feels the touch, is filled in all its limbs, veins, nerves with the
flowing of the wine of the ecstasy, \s{am\,rta}. Love and Ananda are the last word of being, the secret of secrets,
the mystery of mysteries.
\par Thus universalised, personalised, raised to its intensities, made all-occupying, all-embracing, all-fulfilling, the
way of love and delight gives the supreme liberation. Its highest crest is a supracosmic union. But for love
complete union is \s{mukti}; liberation has to it no other sense; and it includes all kinds of \sforced{mukti}
together, nor are they in the end, as some would have it, merely successive to each other and therefore mutually
exclusive. We have the absolute union of the divine with the human spirit, \s{s\=ayujya}; in that reveals itself a
content of all that depends here upon difference,—but there the difference is only a form of oneness,—ananda
too of nearness and contact and mutual presence, \s{s\=am\=ipya}, \s{s\=alokya}, ananda of mutual reflection, the
thing that we call likeness, \s{s\=ad\,r\'sya}, and other wonderful things
Page 605

too for which language has as yet no name. There is nothing which is beyond the reach of the God-lover or
denied to him; for he is the favourite of the divine Lover and the self of the Beloved.

\part
\par
Page 606

\hn Part IV
\par
\ht The Yoga of Self-Perfection

\chapter
\par
Page 607

\hn Chapter I
\par
\ht The Principle of the Integral Yoga
\par\drop The principle of Yoga is the turning of one or of all powers of our human existence into a means of
reaching divine Being. In an ordinary Yoga one main power of being or one group of its powers is made the
means, vehicle, path. In a synthetic Yoga all powers will be combined and included in the transmuting
instrumentation.
\par In Hathayoga the instrument is the body and life. All the power of the body is stilled, collected, purified,
heightened, concentrated to its utmost limits or beyond any limits by Asana and other physical processes; the
power of the life too is similarly \NH purified, heightened, concentrated by Asana and Pranayama. This
concentration of powers is then directed towards that physical centre in which the divine consciousness sits
concealed in the human body. The power of Life, Nature-power, coiled up with all its secret forces asleep in the
lowest nervous plexus of the earth-being,—for only so much escapes into waking \NH action in our normal
operations as is sufficient for the limited uses of human life,—rises awakened through centre after centre and
awakens, too, in its ascent and passage the forces of each successive nodus of our being, the nervous life, the
heart of emotion and ordinary mentality, the speech, sight, will, the higher knowledge, till through and above the
brain it meets with and it becomes one with the divine consciousness.
\par In Rajayoga the chosen instrument is the mind. Our ordinary mentality is first disciplined, purified and
directed towards the divine Being, then by a summary process of Asana and Pranayama the physical force of
our being is stilled and concentrated, the life-force released into a rhythmic movement capable of cessation and
concentrated into a higher power of its upward action, the mind, supported and strengthened by this greater \NH
action and concentration of the body and life upon which it rests,
Page 609

is itself purified of all its unrest and emotion and its habitual thought-waves, liberated from distraction and
dispersion, given its highest force of concentration, gathered up into a trance of absorption. Two objects, the one
temporal, the other eternal, are gained by this discipline. Mind-power develops in another concentrated action
abnormal capacities of knowledge, effective will, deep light of reception, powerful light of thought-radiation
which are altogether beyond the narrow range of our normal mentality; it arrives at the Yogic or occult powers
around which there has been woven so much quite dispensable and yet perhaps salutary mystery. But the one
final end and the one all-important gain is that the mind, stilled and cast into a concentrated trance, can lose itself
in the divine consciousness and the soul be made free to unite with the divine Being.
\par The triple way takes for its chosen instruments the three main powers of the mental soul-life of the human
being. Knowledge selects the reason and the mental vision and it makes them by purification, concentration and a
certain discipline of a God-directed seeking its means for the greatest knowledge and the greatest vision of all,
God-knowledge and God-vision. Its aim is to see, know and be the Divine. Works, action selects for its
instrument the will of the doer of works; it makes life an offering of sacrifice to the Godhead and by purification,
concentration and a certain discipline of subjection to the divine Will a means for contact and increasing unity of
the soul of man with the divine Master of the universe. Devotion selects the emotional and aesthetic powers of
the soul and by turning them all Godward in a perfect purity, intensity, infinite passion of seeking makes them a
means of God-possession in one or many relations of unity with the Divine Being. All aim in their own way at a
union or unity of the human soul with the supreme Spirit.
\par Each Yoga in its process has the character of the instrument it uses; thus the Hathayogic process is
psycho-physical, the Rajayogic mental and psychic, the way of knowledge is spiritual and cognitive, the way of
devotion spiritual, emotional and aesthetic, the way of works spiritual and dynamic by action. Each is guided
Page 610

in the ways of its own characteristic power. But all power is in the end one, all power is really soul-power. In the
ordinary process of life, body and mind this truth is quite obscured by the dispersed, dividing and distributive
action of Nature which is the normal condition of all our functionings, although even there it is in the end evident;
for all material energy contains hidden the vital, mental, psychic, spiritual energy and in the end it must release
these forms of the one Shakti, the vital energy conceals and liberates into action all the other forms, the mental
supporting itself on the life and body and their powers and functionings contains undeveloped or only partially
developed the psychic and the spiritual power of the being. But when by Yoga any of these powers is taken up
from the dispersed and distributive action, raised to its highest degree, concentrated, it becomes manifest
soul-power and reveals the essential unity. Therefore the Hathayogic process has too its pure psychic and
spiritual result, the Rajayogic arrives by psychic means at a spiritual consummation. The triple way may appear
to be altogether mental and spiritual in its way of seeking and its objectives, but it can be attended by results
more characteristic of the other paths, which offer themselves in a spontaneous and involuntary flowering, and
for the same reason, because soul-power is all-power and where it reaches its height in one direction its other
possibilities also begin to show themselves in fact or in incipient potentiality. This unity at once suggests the
possibility of a synthetic Yoga.
\par Tantric discipline is in its nature a synthesis. It has seized on the large universal truth that there are two
poles of being whose essential unity is the secret of existence, Brahman and Shakti, Spirit and Nature, and that
Nature is power of the spirit or rather is spirit as power. To raise nature in man into manifest power of spirit is its
method and it is the whole nature that it gathers up for the spiritual conversion. It includes in its system of
instrumentation the forceful Hathayogic process and especially the opening up of the nervous centres and the
passage through them of the awakened Shakti on her way to her union with the Brahman, the subtler stress of
the Rajayogic purification, meditation and concentration, the leverage of will-force, the motive
Page 611

power of devotion, the key of knowledge. But it does not stop short with an effective assembling of the different
powers of these specific Yogas. In two directions it enlarges by its synthetic turn the province of the Yogic
method. First, it lays its hand firmly on many of the main springs of human quality, desire, action and it subjects
them to an intensive discipline with the soul's mastery of its motives as a first aim and their elevation to a diviner
spiritual level as its final utility. Again, it includes in its objects of Yoga not only liberation,
\note{Mukti.} which is the one all-mastering preoccupation of the specific systems, but a cosmic
enjoyment
\note{Bhukti.} of the power of the Spirit, which the others may take incidentally on the way, in part, casually, but
avoid making a motive or object. It is a bolder and larger system.
\par In the method of synthesis which we have been following, another clue of principle has been pursued which
is derived from another view of the possibilities of Yoga. This starts from the method of Vedanta to arrive at the
aim of the Tantra. In the Tantric method Shakti is all-important, becomes the key to the finding of spirit; in this
synthesis spirit, soul is all-important, \NH becomes the secret of the taking up of Shakti. The Tantric method
starts from the bottom and grades the ladder of ascent upwards to the summit; therefore its initial stress is upon
the action of the awakened Shakti in the nervous system of the body and its centres; the opening of the six
lotuses is the opening up of the ranges of the power of Spirit. Our synthesis takes man as a spirit in mind much
more than a spirit in body and assumes in him the capacity to begin on that level, to spiritualise his being by the
power of the soul in mind opening itself directly to a higher spiritual force and being and to perfect by that higher
force so possessed and brought into action the whole of his nature. For that reason our initial stress has fallen
upon the utilisation of the powers of soul in mind and the turning of the triple key of knowledge, works and love in
the locks of the spirit; the Hathayogic methods can be dispensed with,—though there is no objection to their
partial use,—the Rajayogic will only enter
Page 612

in as an informal element. To arrive by the shortest way at the largest development of spiritual power and being
and divinise by it a liberated nature in the whole range of human living is our inspiring motive.
\par The principle in view is a self-surrender, a giving up of the human being into the being, consciousness,
power, delight of the Divine, a union or communion at all the points of meeting in the soul of man, the mental
being, by which the Divine himself, directly and without veil master and possessor of the instrument, shall by the
light of his presence and guidance perfect the human being in all the forces of the Nature for a divine living.
Here we arrive at a farther enlargement of the objects of the Yoga. The common initial purpose of all Yoga is
the liberation of the soul of man from its present natural ignorance and limitation, its release into spiritual being, its
union with the highest self and Divinity. But ordinarily this is made not only the initial but the whole and final
object: enjoyment of spiritual being there is, but either in a dissolution of the human and individual into the silence
of self-being or on a higher plane in another existence. The Tantric system makes liberation the final, but not the
only aim; it takes on its way a full perfection and enjoyment of the spiritual power, light and joy in the human
existence, and even it has a glimpse of a supreme experience in which liberation and cosmic action and
enjoyment are unified in a final overcoming of all oppositions and dissonances. It is this wider view of our
spiritual potentialities from which we begin, but we add another stress which brings in a completer significance.
We regard the spirit in man not as solely an individual being travelling to a transcendent unity with the Divine, but
as a universal being capable of oneness with the Divine in all souls and all Nature and we give this extended
view its entire practical consequence. The human soul's individual liberation and enjoyment of union with the
Divine in spiritual being, consciousness and delight must always be the first object of the Yoga; its free
enjoyment of the cosmic unity of the Divine becomes a second object; but out of that a third appears, the
effectuation of the meaning of the divine unity with all beings by a sympathy and participation in
Page 613

the spiritual purpose of the Divine in humanity. The individual Yoga then turns from its separateness and
becomes a part of the collective Yoga of the divine Nature in the human race. The liberated individual being,
united with the Divine in self and spirit, becomes in his natural being a self-perfecting instrument for the perfect
outflowering of the Divine in humanity.
\par This outflowering has its two terms; first, comes the growth out of the separative human ego into the unity
of the spirit, then the possession of the divine nature in its proper and its higher forms and no longer in the inferior
forms of the mental being which are a mutilated translation and not the authentic text of the original script of
divine Nature in the cosmic individual. In other words, a perfection has to be aimed at which amounts to the
elevation of the mental into the full spiritual and supramental nature. Therefore this integral Yoga of knowledge,
love and works has to be extended into a Yoga of spiritual and gnostic self-perfection. As gnostic knowledge,
will and ananda are a direct instrumentation of spirit and can only be won by growing into the spirit, into divine
being, this growth has to be the first aim of our Yoga. The mental being has to enlarge itself into the oneness of
the Divine before the Divine will perfect in the soul of the individual its gnostic outflowering. That is the reason
why the triple way of knowledge, works and love becomes the key-note of the whole Yoga, for that is the direct
means for the soul in mind to rise to its highest intensities where it passes upward into the divine oneness. That
too is the reason why the Yoga must be integral. For if immergence in the Infinite or some close union with the
Divine were all our aim, an integral Yoga would be superfluous, except for such greater satisfaction of the being
of man as we may get by a self-lifting of the whole of it towards its Source. But it would not be needed for the
essential aim, since by any single power of the soul-nature we can meet with the Divine; each at its height rises
up into the infinite and absolute, each therefore offers a sufficient way of arrival, for all the hundred separate
paths meet in the Eternal. But the gnostic being is a complete enjoyment and possession of the whole divine and
spiritual nature; and it is a complete
Page 614

lifting of the whole nature of man into its power of a divine and spiritual existence. Integrality becomes then an
essential condition of this Yoga.
\par At the same time we have seen that each of the three ways at its height, if it is pursued with a certain
largeness, can take into itself the powers of the others and lead to their fulfilment. It is therefore sufficient to
start by one of them and find the point at which it meets the other at first parallel lines of advance and melts into
them by its own widenings. At the same time a more difficult, complex, wholly powerful process would be to
start, as it were, on three lines together, on a triple wheel of soul-power. But the consideration of this possibility
must be postponed till we have seen what are the conditions and means of the Yoga of self-perfection. For we
shall see that this also need not be postponed entirely, but a certain preparation of it is part of and a certain
initiation into it proceeds by the growth of the divine works, love and knowledge.
Page 615

\par
\hn Chapter II
\par
\ht The Integral Perfection
\par\drop A divine perfection of the human being is our aim. We must know then first what are the essential
elements that constitute man's total perfection; secondly, what we mean by a divine as distinguished from a
human perfection of our being. That man as a being is capable of self-development and of some approach at
least to an ideal standard of perfection which his mind is able to conceive, fix before it and pursue, is common
ground to all thinking humanity, though it may be only the minority who concern themselves with this possibility as
providing the one most important aim of life. But by some the ideal is conceived as a mundane change, by others
as a religious conversion.
\par The mundane perfection is sometimes conceived of as something outward, social, a thing of action, a more
rational dealing with our fellow-men and our environment, a better and more efficient citizenship and discharge of
duties, a better, richer, kindlier and happier way of living, with a more just and more harmonious associated
enjoyment of the opportunities of existence. By others again a more inner and subjective ideal is cherished, a
clarifying and raising of the intelligence, will and reason, a heightening and ordering of power and capacity in the
nature, a nobler ethical, a richer aesthetic, a finer emotional, a much healthier and better-governed vital and
physical being. Sometimes one element is stressed, almost to the exclusion of the rest; sometimes, in wider and
more well-balanced minds, the whole harmony is envisaged as a total perfection. A change of education and
social institutions is the outward means adopted or an inner self-training and development is preferred as the true
instrumentation. Or the two aims may be clearly united, the perfection of the inner individual, the perfection of
the outer living.
\par But the mundane aim takes for its field the present life
Page 616

and its opportunities; the religious aim on the contrary fixes before it the self-preparation for another existence
after death, its commonest ideal is some kind of pure sainthood, its means a conversion of the imperfect or sinful
human being by divine grace or through obedience to a law laid down by a scripture or else given by a religious
founder. The aim of religion may include a social change, but it is then a change brought about by the acceptance
of a common religious ideal and way of consecrated living, a brotherhood of the saints, a theocracy or kingdom
of God reflecting on earth the kingdom of heaven.
\par The object of our synthetic Yoga must, in this respect too as in its other parts, be more integral and
comprehensive, embrace all these elements or these tendencies of a larger impulse of self-perfection and
harmonise them or rather unify, and in order to do that successfully it must seize on a truth which is wider than
the ordinary religious and higher than the mundane principle. All life is a secret Yoga, an obscure growth of
Nature towards the discovery and fulfilment of the divine principle hidden in her which becomes progressively
less obscure, more self-conscient and luminous, more self-possessed in the human being by the opening of all his
instruments of knowledge, will, action, life to the Spirit within him and in the world. Mind, life, body, all the forms
of our nature are the means of this growth, but they find their last perfection only by opening out to something
beyond them, first, because they are not the whole of what man is, secondly, because that other something which
he is, is the key of his completeness and brings a light which discovers to him the whole high and large reality of
his being.
\par Mind is fulfilled by a greater knowledge of which it is only a half-light, life discovers its meaning in a greater
power and will of which it is the outward and as yet obscure functioning, body finds its last use as an instrument
of a power of being of which it is a physical support and material starting-point. They have all themselves first to
be developed and find out their ordinary possibilities; all our normal life is a trying of these possibilities and an
opportunity for this preparatory and tentative self-training. But life cannot find its perfect self-fulfilment till it
opens to
Page 617

that greater reality of being of which by this development of a richer power and a more sensitive use and
capacity it becomes a well-prepared field of working.
\par Intellectual, volitional, ethical, emotional, aesthetic and physical training and improvement are all so much to
the good, but they are only in the end a constant movement in a circle without any last delivering and illumining
aim, unless they arrive at a point when they can open themselves to the power and presence of the Spirit and
admit its direct workings. This direct working effects a conversion of the whole being which is the indispensable
condition of our real perfection. To grow into the truth and power of the Spirit and by the direct action of that
power to be made a fit channel of its self-expression,—a living of man in the Divine and a divine living of the
Spirit in humanity,—will therefore be the principle and the whole object of an integral Yoga of self-perfection.
\par In the process of this change there must be by the very necessity of the effort two stages of its working.
First, there will be the personal endeavour of the human being, as soon as he becomes aware by his soul, mind,
heart of this divine possibility and turns towards it as the true object of life, to prepare himself for it and to get rid
of all in him that belongs to a lower working, of all that stands in the way of his opening to the spiritual truth and
its power, so as to possess by this liberation his spiritual being and turn all his natural movements into free means
of its self-expression. It is by this turn that the self-conscious Yoga aware of its aim begins: there is a new
awakening and an upward change of the life motive. So long as there is only an intellectual, ethical and other
self-training for the now normal purposes of life which does not travel beyond the ordinary circle of working of
mind, life and body, we are still only in the obscure and yet unillumined preparatory Yoga of Nature; we are still
in pursuit of only an ordinary human perfection. A spiritual desire of the Divine and of the divine perfection, of a
unity with him in all our being and a spiritual perfection in all our nature, is the effective sign of this change, the
precursory power of a great integral conversion of our being and living.
Page 618

\par By personal effort a precursory change, a preliminary conversion can be effected; it amounts to a greater or
less spiritualising of our mental motives, our character and temperament, and a mastery, stilling or changed action
of the vital and physical life. This converted subjectivity can be made the base of some communion or unity of
the soul in mind with the Divine and some partial reflection of the divine nature in the mentality of the human
being. That is as far as man can go by his unaided or indirectly aided effort, because that is an effort of mind and
mind cannot climb beyond itself permanently: at most it arises to a spiritualised and idealised mentality. If it
shoots up beyond that border, it loses hold of itself, loses hold of life, and arrives either at a trance of absorption
or a passivity. A greater perfection can only be arrived at by a higher power entering in and taking up the whole
action of the being. The second stage of this Yoga will therefore be a persistent giving up of all the action of the
nature into the hands of this greater Power, a substitution of its influence, possession and working for the
personal effort, until the Divine to whom we aspire becomes the direct master of the Yoga and effects the entire
spiritual and ideal conversion of the being.
\par This double character of our Yoga raises it beyond the mundane ideal of perfection, while at the same time
it goes too beyond the loftier, intenser, but much narrower religious formula. The mundane ideal regards man
always as a mental, vital and physical being and it aims at a human perfection well within these limits, a
perfection of mind, life and body, an expansion and refinement of the intellect and knowledge, of the will and
power, of ethical character, aim and conduct, of aesthetic sensibility and creativeness, of emotional balanced
poise and enjoyment, of vital and physical soundness, regulated action and just efficiency. It is a wide and full
aim, but yet not sufficiently full and wide, because it ignores that other greater element of our being which the
mind vaguely conceives as the spiritual \NH element and leaves it either undeveloped or insufficiently satisfied as
merely some high occasional or added derivatory experience, the result of the action of mind in its exceptional
aspects or dependent upon mind for its presence and persistence. It can
Page 619

become a high aim when it seeks to develop the loftier and the larger reaches of our mentality, but yet not
sufficiently high, because it does not aspire beyond mind to that of which our purest reason, our brightest mental
intuition, our deepest mental sense and feeling, strongest mental will and power or ideal aim and purpose are only
pale radiations. Its aim besides is limited to a terrestrial perfection of the normal human life.
\par A Yoga of integral perfection regards man as a divine spiritual being involved in mind, life and body; it aims
therefore at a liberation and a perfection of his divine nature. It seeks to make an inner living in the perfectly
developed spiritual being his constant intrinsic living and the spiritualised action of mind, life and body only its
outward human expression. In order that this spiritual being may not be something vague and indefinable or else
but imperfectly realised and dependent on the mental support and the mental limitations, it seeks to go beyond
mind to the supramental knowledge, will, sense, feeling, intuition, dynamic initiation of vital and physical action, all
that makes the native working of the spiritual being. It accepts human life, but takes account of the large
supraterrestrial action behind the earthly material living, and it joins itself to the divine Being from whom the
supreme origination of all these partial and lower states proceeds so that the whole of life may become aware of
its divine source and feel in each action of knowledge, of will, of feeling, sense and body the divine originating
impulse. It rejects nothing that is essential in the mundane aim, but enlarges it, finds and lives in its greater and its
truer meaning now hidden from it, transfigures it from a limited, earthly and mortal thing to a figure of infinite,
divine and immortal values.
\par The integral Yoga meets the religious ideal at several points, but goes beyond it in the sense of a greater
wideness. The religious ideal looks, not only beyond this earth, but away from it to a heaven or even beyond all
heavens to some kind of Nirvana. Its ideal of perfection is limited to whatever kind of inner or outer mutation will
eventually serve the turning away of the soul from the human life to the beyond. Its ordinary idea of perfection is
a religio-ethical change, a drastic purification of the active and the
Page 620

emotional being, often with an ascetic abrogation and rejection of the vital impulses as its completest reaching of
excellence, and in any case a supraterrestrial motive and reward or result of a life of piety and right conduct. In
so far as it admits a change of knowledge, will, aesthesis, it is in the sense of the turning of them to another
object than the aims of human life and eventually brings a rejection of all earthly objects of aesthesis, will and
knowledge. The method, whether it lays stress on personal effort or upon divine influence, on works and
knowledge or upon grace, is not like the mundane a development, but rather a conversion; but in the end the aim
is not a conversion of our mental and physical nature, but the putting on of a pure spiritual nature and being, and
since that is not possible here on earth, it looks for its consummation by a transference to another world or a
shuffling off of all cosmic existence.
\par But the integral Yoga founds itself on a conception of the spiritual being as an omnipresent existence, the
fullness of which comes not essentially by a transference to other worlds or a cosmic self-extinction, but by a
growth out of what we now are phenomenally into the consciousness of the omnipresent reality which we
always are in the essence of our being. It substitutes for the form of religious piety its completer spiritual seeking
of a divine union. It proceeds by a personal effort to a conversion through a divine influence and possession; but
this divine grace, if we may so call it, is not simply a mysterious flow or touch coming from above, but the
all-pervading act of a divine presence which we come to know within as the power of the highest Self and
Master of our being entering into the soul and so possessing it that we not only feel it close to us and pressing
upon our mortal nature, but live in its law, know that law, possess it as the whole power of our spiritualised
nature. The conversion its action will effect is an integral conversion of our ethical being into the Truth and Right
of the divine nature, of our intellectual into the illumination of divine knowledge, our emotional into the divine love
and unity, our dynamic and volitional into a working of the divine power, our aesthetic into a plenary reception
and a creative enjoyment of divine beauty, not excluding even in
Page 621

the end a divine conversion of the vital and physical being. It regards all the previous life as an involuntary and
unconscious or half-conscious preparatory growing towards this change and Yoga as the voluntary and
conscious effort and realisation of the change, by which all the aim of human existence in all its parts is fulfilled,
even while it is transfigured. Admitting the supracosmic truth and life in worlds beyond, it admits too the
terrestrial as a continued term of the one existence and a change of individual and communal life on earth as a
strain of its divine meaning.
\par To open oneself to the supracosmic Divine is an essential condition of this integral perfection; to unite
oneself with the universal Divine is another essential condition. Here the Yoga of self-perfection coincides with
the Yogas of knowledge, works and devotion; for it is impossible to change the human nature into the divine or to
make it an instrument of the divine knowledge, will and joy of existence, unless there is a union with the supreme
Being, Consciousness and Bliss and a unity with its universal Self in all things and beings. A wholly separative
possession of the divine nature by the human individual, as distinct from a self-withdrawn absorption in it, is not
possible. But this unity will not be an inmost spiritual oneness qualified, so long as the human life lasts, by a
separative existence in mind, life and body; the full perfection is a possession, through this spiritual unity, of unity
too with the universal Mind, the universal Life, the universal Form which are the other constant terms of cosmic
being. Moreover, since human life is still accepted as a self-expression of the realised Divine in man, there must
be an action of the entire divine nature in our life; and this brings in the need of the supramental conversion
which substitutes the native action of spiritual being for the imperfect action of the superficial nature and
spiritualises and transfigures its mental, vital and physical parts by the spiritual ideality. These three elements, a
union with the supreme Divine, unity with the universal Self, and a supramental life action from this transcendent
origin and through this universality, but still with the individual as the soul-channel and natural instrument,
constitute the essence of the integral divine perfection of the human being.
Page 622

\par
\hn Chapter III
\par
\ht The Psychology of Self-Perfection
\par\drop Essentially, then, this divine self-perfection is a conversion of the human into a likeness of and a
fundamental oneness with the divine nature, a rapid shaping of the image of God in man and filling in of its ideal
outlines. It is what is ordinarily termed \s{s\=ad\,r\'sya-mukti}, a liberation into the divine resemblance out of the
bondage of the human seeming, or, to use the expression of the Gita, \s{s\=adharmya-gati}, a coming to be one in
law of being with the supreme, universal and indwelling Divine. To perceive and have a right view of our way to
such a transformation we must form some sufficient working idea of the complex thing that this human nature at
present is in the confused interminglings of its various principles, so that we may see the precise nature of the
conversion each part of it must undergo and the most effective means for the conversion. How to disengage
from this knot of thinking mortal matter the Immortal it contains, from this mentalised vital animal man the happy
fullness of his submerged hints of Godhead, is the real problem of a human being and living. Life develops many
first hints of the divinity without completely disengaging them; Yoga is the unravelling of the knot of Life's
difficulty.
\par First of all we have to know the central secret of the psychological complexity which creates the problem
and all its difficulties. But an ordinary psychology which only takes mind and its phenomena at their surface
values, will be of no help to us; it will not give us the least guidance in this line of self-exploration and
self-conversion. Still less can we find the clue in a scientific psychology with a materialistic basis which assumes
that the body and the biological and physiological factors of our nature are not only the starting-point but the
whole real foundation and regards human mind as only a subtle development from the life and the body. That
may be the actual truth of the
Page 623

animal side of human nature and of the human mind in so far as it is limited and conditioned by the physical part
of our being. But the whole difference between man and the animal is that the animal mind, as we know it,
cannot get for one moment away from its origins, cannot break out from the covering, the close chrysalis which
the bodily life has spun round the soul, and become something greater than its present self, a more free,
magnificent and noble being; but in man mind reveals itself as a greater energy escaping from the restrictions of
the vital and physical formula of being. But even this is not all that man is or can be: he has in him the power to
evolve and release a still greater ideal energy which in its turn escapes out of the restrictions of the mental
formula of his nature and discloses the supramental form, the ideal power of a spiritual being. In Yoga we have
to travel beyond the physical nature and the superficial man and to discover the workings of the whole nature of
the real man. In other words we must arrive at and use a psycho-physical knowledge with a spiritual foundation.
\par Man is in his real nature,—however obscure now this truth may be to our present understanding and
self-consciousness, we must for the purposes of Yoga have faith in it, and we shall then find that our faith is
justified by an increasing experience and a greater self-knowledge,—a spirit using the mind, life and body for an
individual and a communal experience and self-manifestation in the universe. This spirit is an infinite existence
limiting itself in apparent being for individual experience. It is an infinite consciousness which defines itself in
finite forms of consciousness for joy of various knowledge and various power of being. It is an infinite delight of
being expanding and contracting itself and its powers, concealing and discovering, formulating many terms of its
joy of existence, even to an apparent obscuration and denial of its own nature. In itself it is eternal
Sachchidananda, but this complexity, this knotting up and unravelling of the infinite in the finite is the aspect we
see it assume in universal and in individual nature. To discover the eternal Sachchidananda, this essential self of
our being within us, and live in it is the stable basis, to make its true nature
Page 624

evident and creative of a divine way of living in our instruments, supermind, mind, life and body, the active
principle of a spiritual perfection.
\par Supermind, mind, life and body are the four instruments which the spirit uses for its manifestation in the
workings of Nature. Supermind is spiritual consciousness acting as a self-luminous knowledge, will, sense,
aesthesis, energy, self-creative and unveiling power of its own delight and being. Mind is the action of the same
powers, but limited and only very indirectly and partially illumined. Supermind lives in unity though it plays with
diversity; mind lives in a separative action of diversity, though it may open to unity. Mind is not only capable of
ignorance, but, because it acts always partially and by limitation, it works characteristically as a power of
ignorance: it may even and it does forget itself in a complete inconscience, or nescience, awaken from it to the
ignorance of a partial knowledge and move from the ignorance towards a complete knowledge,—that is its
natural action in the human being,—but it can never have by itself a complete knowledge. Supermind is incapable
of real ignorance; even if it puts full knowledge behind it in the limitation of a particular working, yet all its
working refers back to what it has put behind it and all is instinct with self-illumination; even if it involves itself in
material nescience, it yet does there accurately the works of a perfect will and knowledge. Supermind lends itself
to the action of the inferior instruments; it is always there indeed at the core as a secret support of their \NH
operations. In matter it is an automatic action and effectuation of the hidden idea in things; in life its most seizable
form is instinct, an instinctive, subconscious or partly subconscious knowledge and operation; in mind it reveals
itself as intuition, a swift, direct and self-effective illumination of intelligence, will, sense and aesthesis. But these
are merely irradiations of the supermind which accommodate themselves to the limited functioning of the
obscurer instruments: its own characteristic nature is a gnosis superconscient to mind, life and body. Supermind
or gnosis is the characteristic, illumined, significant action of spirit in its own native reality.
Page 625

\par Life is an energy of spirit subordinated to action of mind and body, which fulfils itself through mentality and
physicality and acts as a link between them. It has its own characteristic operation but nowhere works
independently of mind and body. All energy of the spirit in action works in the two terms of existence and
consciousness, for the self-formation of existence and the play and self-realisation of consciousness, for the
delight of existence and the delight of consciousness. In this inferior formulation of being in which we at present
live, the spirit's energy of life works between the two terms of mind and matter, supporting and effecting the
formulations of substance of matter and working as a material energy, supporting the formulations of
consciousness of mind and the workings of mental energy, supporting the interaction of mind and body and
working as a sensory and nervous energy. What we call vitality is for the purposes of our normal human
existence power of conscious being emerging in matter, liberating from it and in it mind and the higher powers
and supporting their limited action in the physical life,—just as what we call mentality is power of conscious being
awaking in body to light of its own consciousness and to consciousness of all the rest of being immediately
around it and working at first in the limited action set for it by life and body, but at certain points and at a certain
height escaping from it to a partial action beyond this circle. But this is not the whole power whether of life or
mentality; they have planes of conscious existence of their own kind, other than this material level, where they
are freer in their characteristic action. Matter or body itself is a limiting form of substance of spirit in which life
and mind and spirit are involved, self-hidden, self-forgetful by absorption in their own externalising action, but
bound to emerge from it by a self-compelling evolution. But matter too is capable of refining to subtler forms of
substance in which it becomes more apparently a formal density of life, of mind, of spirit. Man himself has,
besides this gross material body, an encasing vital sheath, a mental body, a body of bliss and gnosis. But all
matter, all body contains within it the secret powers of these higher principles; matter is a formation of life that
has no
Page 626

real existence apart from the informing universal spirit which gives it its energy and substance.
\par This is the nature of spirit and its instruments. But to understand its operations and to get at a knowledge
which will give to us a power of leverage in uplifting them out of the established groove in which our life goes
spinning, we have to perceive that the Spirit has based all its workings upon two twin aspects of its being, Soul
and Nature, Purusha and Prakriti. We have to treat them as different and diverse in power,—for in practice of
consciousness this difference is valid,—although they are only two sides of the same reality, pole and pole of the
one conscious being. Purusha or soul is spirit cognizant of the workings of its nature, supporting them by its being,
enjoying or rejecting enjoyment of them in its delight of being. Nature is power of the spirit, and she is too
working and process of its power formulating name and form of being, developing action of consciousness and
knowledge, throwing itself up in will and impulsion, force and energy, fulfilling itself in enjoyment. Nature is
Prakriti, Maya, Shakti. If we look at her on her most external side where she seems the opposite of Purusha, she
is Prakriti, an inert and mechanical self-driven operation, inconscient or conscient only by the light of Purusha,
elevated by various \NH degrees, vital, mental, supramental, of his soul-illumination of her workings. If we look
at her on her other internal side where she moves nearer to unity with Purusha, she is Maya, will of being and
becoming or of cessation from being and becoming with all their results, apparent to the consciousness, of
involution and evolution, existing and non-existing, self-concealment of spirit and self-discovery of spirit. Both are
sides of one and the same thing, Shakti, power of being of the spirit which operates, whether superconsciously or
consciously or subconsciously in a seeming inconscience,—in fact all these motions coexist at the same time and
in the same soul,—as the spirit's power of knowledge, power of will, power of process and action,
\s{j\~n\=ana-\'sakti}, \s{icch\=a-\'sakti}, \s{kriy\=a-\'sakti}. By this power the spirit creates all things in itself, hides and
discovers all itself in the form and behind the veil of its manifestation.
Page 627

\par Purusha is able by this power of its nature to take whatever poise it may will and to follow the law and form
of being proper to any self-formulation. It is eternal soul and spirit in its own power of self-existence superior to
and governing its manifestations; it is universal soul and spirit developed in power of becoming of its existence,
infinite in the finite; it is individual soul and spirit absorbed in development of some particular course of its
becoming, in appearance mutably finite in the infinite. All these things it can be at once, eternal spirit
universalised in cosmos, individualised in its beings; it can too found the consciousness rejecting, governing or
responding to the action of Nature in any one of them, put the others behind it or away from it, know itself as
pure eternity, self-supporting universality or exclusive individuality. Whatever the formulation of its nature, soul
can seem to become that and view itself as that only in the frontal active part of its consciousness; but it is never
only what it seems to be; it is too the so much else that it can be; secretly, it is the all of itself that is yet hidden. It
is not irrevocably limited by any particular self-formulation in Time, but can break through and beyond it, break it
up or develop it, select, reject, new-create, reveal out of itself a greater self-formulation. What it believes itself to
be by the whole active will of its consciousness in its instruments, that it is or tends to become, \s{yo
yacchraddha\,h sa eva sa\,h}: what it believes it can be and has full faith in becoming, that it changes to in nature,
evolves or discovers.
\par This power of the soul over its nature is of the utmost importance in the Yoga of self-perfection; if it did not
exist, we could never get by conscious endeavour and aspiration out of the fixed groove of our present imperfect
human being; if any greater perfection were intended, we should have to wait for Nature to effect it in her own
slow or swift process of evolution. In the lower forms of being the soul accepts this complete subjection to
Nature, but as it rises higher in the scale, it awakes to a sense of something in itself which can command Nature;
but it is only when it arrives at self-knowledge that this free will and control becomes a complete reality. The
change effects itself through process of nature, not therefore by any capricious magic, but an
Page 628

ordered development and intelligible process. When complete mastery is gained, then the process by its
self-effective rapidity may seem a miracle to the intelligence, but it still proceeds by law of the truth of
Spirit,—when the Divine within us by close union of our will and being with him takes up the Yoga and acts as
the omnipotent master of the nature. For the Divine is our highest Self and the self of all Nature, the eternal and
universal Purusha.
\par Purusha may establish himself in any plane of being, take any principle of being as the immediate head of his
power and live in the working of its proper mode of conscious action. The soul may dwell in the principle of
infinite unity of self-existence and be aware of all consciousness, energy, delight, knowledge, will, activity as
conscious form of this essential truth, Sat or Satya. It may dwell in the principle of infinite conscious energy,
Tapas, and be aware of it unrolling out of self-existence the works of knowledge, will and dynamic soul-action
for the enjoyment of an infinite delight of the being. It may dwell in the principle of infinite self-existent delight
and be aware of the divine Ananda creating out of its self-existence by its energy whatever harmony of being. In
these three poises the consciousness of unity dominates; the soul lives in its awareness of eternity, universality,
unity, and whatever diversity there is, is not separative, but only a multitudinous aspect of oneness. It may dwell
too in the principle of supermind, in a luminous self-determining knowledge, will and action which develops some
coordination of perfect delight of conscious being. In the higher gnosis unity is the basis, but it takes its joy in
diversity; in lower fact of supermind diversity is the basis, but it refers back always to a conscious unity and it
takes joy in unity. These ranges of consciousness are beyond our present level; they are superconscious to our
normal mentality. That belongs to a lower hemisphere of being.
\par This lower being begins where a veil falls between soul and nature, between spirit in supermind and spirit in
mind, life and body. Where this veil has not fallen, these instrumental powers are not what they are in us, but an
enlightened part of the unified
Page 629

action of supermind and spirit. Mind gets to an independent idea of its own action when it forgets to refer back to
the light from which it derives and becomes absorbed in the possibilities of its own separative process and
enjoyment. The soul when it dwells in the principle of mind, not yet subject to but user of life and body, knows
itself as a mental being working out its mental life and forces and images, bodies of the subtle mental substance,
\NH according to its individual knowledge, will and dynamis modified by its relation to other similar beings and
powers in the universal mind. When it dwells in the principle of life, it knows itself as a being of the universal life
working out action and consciousness by its desires under similar modifying conditions proper to a universal
life-soul whose action is through many individual life-beings. When it dwells in the principle of matter, it knows
itself as a consciousness of matter acting under a similar law of the energy of material being. In proportion as it
leans towards the side of knowledge, it is aware of itself more or less clearly as a soul of mind, a soul of life, a
soul of body viewing and acting in or acted upon by its nature; but where it leans towards the side of ignorance, it
knows itself as an ego identified with nature of mind, of life or of body, a creation of Nature. But the native
tendency of material being leads towards an absorption of the soul's energy in the act of formation and material
movement and a consequent self-oblivion of the conscious being. The material universe begins from an apparent
inconscience.
\par The universal Purusha dwells in all these planes in a certain simultaneity and builds upon each of these
principles a world or series of worlds with its beings who live in the nature of that principle. Man, the microcosm,
has all these planes in his own being, ranged from his subconscient to his superconscient existence. By a
developing power of Yoga he can become aware of these concealed worlds hidden from his physical,
materialised mind and senses which know only the material world, and then he becomes aware that his material
existence is not a thing apart and self-existent, as the material universe in which he lives is also not a thing apart
and self-existent, but is in constant relation to the higher planes and acted on by their powers and beings. He
Page 630

can open up and increase the action of these higher planes in himself and enjoy some sort of participation in the
life of the other worlds,—which, for the rest, are or can be his dwelling-place, that is to say, the station of his
awareness, \s{dh\=ama}, after death or between death and rebirth in a material body. But his most important
capacity is that of developing the powers of the higher principles in himself, a greater power of life, a purer light
of mind, the illumination of supermind, the infinite being, consciousness and delight of spirit. By an ascending
movement he can develop his human imperfection towards that greater perfection.
\par But whatever his aim, however exalted his aspiration, he has to begin from the law of his present
imperfection, to take full account of it and see how it can be converted to the law of a possible perfection. This
present law of his being starts from the inconscience of the material universe, an involution of the soul in form
and subjection to material nature; and, though in this matter life and mind have developed their own energies, yet
they are limited and bound up in the action of the lower material, which is to the ignorance of his practical
surface consciousness his original principle. Mind in him, though he is an embodied mental being, has to bear the
control of the body and the physical life and can only by some more or less considerable effort of energy and
concentration consciously control life and body. It is only by increasing that control that he can move towards
perfection,—and it is only by developing soul-power that he can reach it. Nature-power in him has to become
more and more completely a conscious act of soul, a conscious expression of all the will and knowledge of spirit.
Prakriti has to reveal itself as shakti of the Purusha.
Page 631

\par
\hn Chapter IV
\par
\ht The Perfection of the Mental Being
\par\drop The fundamental idea of a Yoga of self-perfection must be, under these conditions, a reversal of the
present relations of the soul of man to his mental, vital and physical nature. Man is at present a partly
self-conscious soul subject to and limited by mind, life and body, who has to become an entirely self-conscious
soul master of his mind, life and body. Not limited by their claims and demands, a perfect self-conscious soul
would be superior to and a free possessor of its instruments. This effort of man to be master of his own being
has been the sense of a large part of his past spiritual, intellectual and moral strivings.
\par In order to be possessor of his being with any complete reality of freedom and mastery, man must find out
his highest self, the real man or highest Purusha in him, which is free and master in its own inalienable power. He
must cease to be the mental, vital, physical ego; for that is always the creation, instrument and subject of mental,
vital, physical Nature. This ego is not his real self, but an instrumentation of Nature by which it has developed a
sense of limited and separate individual being in mind, life and body. By this instrumentation he acts as if he were
a separate existence in the material universe. Nature has evolved certain habitual limiting conditions under which
that action takes place; self-identification of the soul with the ego is the means by which she induces the soul to
consent to this action and accept these habitual limiting conditions. While the identification lasts, there is a
self-imprisonment in this habitual round and narrow action, and, until it is transcended, there can be no free use
by the soul of its individual living, much less a real self-exceeding. For this reason an essential movement of the
Yoga is to draw back from the outward ego sense by which we are identified with the action of mind, life and
body and live
Page 632

inwardly in the soul. The liberation from an externalised ego sense is the first step towards the soul's freedom
and mastery.
\par When we thus draw back into the soul, we find ourselves to be not the mind, but a mental being who stands
behind the action of the embodied mind, not a mental and vital personality,—personality is a composition of
Nature,—but a mental Person, \s{manomaya puru\,sa}. We become aware of a being within who takes his stand
upon mind for self-knowledge and world-knowledge and thinks of himself as an individual for self-experience and
world-experience, for an inward action and an outward-going action, but is yet different from mind, life and body.
This sense of difference from the vital actions and the physical being is very marked; for although the Purusha
feels his mind to be involved in life and body, yet he is aware that even if the physical life and body were to
cease or be dissolved, he would still go on existing in his mental being. But the sense of difference from the mind
is more difficult and less firmly distinct. But still it is there; it is characterised by any or all of three intuitions in
which this mental Purusha lives and becomes by them aware of his own greater existence.
\par First, he has the intuition of himself as someone observing the action of the mind; it is something which is
going on in him and yet before him as an object of his regarding knowledge. This self-awareness is the intuitive
sense of the witness Purusha, \s{s\=ak\,s\=i}. Witness Purusha is a pure consciousness who watches Nature and sees
it as an action reflected upon the consciousness and enlightened by that consciousness, but in itself other than it.
To mental Purusha Nature is only an action, a complex action of discriminating and combining thought, of will, of
sense, of emotion, of temperament and character, of ego feeling, which works upon a foundation of vital
impulses, needs and cravings in the conditions imposed by the physical body. But it is not limited by them, since it
can not only give them new directions and much variation, refining and extension, but is able to act in thought and
imagination and a mental world of much more subtle and flexible creations. But also there is an intuition in the
mental Purusha of something larger and greater than this present
Page 633

action in which he lives, a range of experience of which it is only a frontal scheme or a narrow superficial
selection. By this intuition he stands upon the threshold of a subliminal self with a more extended possibility than
this superficial mentality opens to his self-knowledge. A last and greatest intuition is an inner awareness of
something which he more essentially is, something as high above mind as mind is above the physical life and
body. This inner awareness is his intuition of his supramental and spiritual being.
\par The mental Purusha can at any time involve himself again in the superficial action from which he has drawn
back, live for a while entirely identified with the mechanism of mind, life and body and absorbedly repeat its
recurrent normal action. But once that separative movement has been made and lived in for some time, he can
never be to himself quite what he was before. The involution in the outward action becomes now only a
recurrent self-oblivion from which there is a tendency in him to draw back again to himself and to pure
self-experience. It may be noted too that the Purusha by drawing back from the normal action of this outward
consciousness which has created for him his present natural form of self-experience, is able to take two other
poises. He can have an intuition of himself as a soul in body, which puts forth life as its activity and mind as the
light of that activity. This soul in body is the physical conscious being, \s{annamaya puru\,sa}, which uses life and
mind characteristically for physical experience,—all else being regarded as a consequence of physical
experience,—does not look beyond the life of the body and, so far as it feels anything beyond its physical
individuality, is aware only of the physical universe and at most its oneness with the soul of physical Nature. But
he can have too an intuition of himself as a soul of life, self-identified with a great movement of becoming in
Time, which puts forth body as a form or basic sense-image and mind as a conscious activity of life-experience.
This soul in life is the vital conscious being, \s{pr\=a\,namaya puru\,sa}, which is capable of looking beyond the
duration and limits of the physical body, of feeling an eternity of life behind and in front, an identity with a
universal Life-being, but does not look
Page 634

beyond a constant vital becoming in Time. These three Purushas are soul-forms of the Spirit by which it
identifies its conscious existence with and founds its action upon any of these three planes or principles of its
universal being.
\par But man is characteristically a mental being. Moreover, mentality is his highest present status in which he is
nearest to his real self, most easily and largely aware of spirit. His way to perfection is not to involve himself in
the outward or superficial existence, nor is it to place himself in the soul of life or the soul of body, but to insist on
the three mental intuitions by which he can lift himself eventually above the physical, vital and mental levels. This
insistence may take two quite different forms, each with its own object and way of proceeding. It is quite
possible for him to accentuate it in a direction away from existence in Nature, a detachment, a withdrawal from
mind, life and body. He may try to live more and more as the witness Purusha, regarding the action of Nature,
without interest in it, without sanction to it, detached, rejecting the whole action, withdrawing into pure conscious
existence. This is the Sankhya liberation. He may go inward into that larger existence of which he has the
intuition and away from the superficial mentality into a dream-state or sleep-state which admits him into wider or
higher ranges of consciousness. By passing away into these ranges he may put away from him the terrestrial
being. There is even, it was supposed in ancient times, a transition to supramental worlds from which a return to
earthly consciousness was either not possible or not obligatory. But the definite and sure finality of this kind of
liberation depends on the elevation of the mental being into that spiritual self of which he becomes aware when
he looks away and upward from all mentality. That is given as the key to entire cessation from terrestrial
existence whether by immergence in pure being or a participation in supracosmic being.
\par But if our aim is to be not only free by self-detachment from Nature, but perfected in mastery, this type of
insistence can no longer suffice. We have to regard our mental, vital and physical action of Nature, find out the
knots of its bondage and the loosing-points of liberation, discover the keys of its
Page 635

\NH imperfection and lay our finger on the key of perfection. When the regarding soul, the witness Purusha
stands back from his action of nature and observes it, he sees that it proceeds of its own impulsion by the power
of its mechanism, by force of continuity of movement, continuity of mentality, continuity of life impulse, continuity
of an involuntary physical mechanism. At first the whole thing seems to be the recurrent action of an automatic
machinery, although the sum of that action mounts constantly into a creation, development, evolution. He was as
if seized in this wheel, attached to it by the ego sense, whirled round and onward in the circling of the machinery.
A complete mechanical determinism or a stream of determinations of Nature to which he lent the light of his
consciousness, is the natural aspect of his mental, vital and physical personality once it is regarded from this
stable detached standpoint and no longer by a soul caught up in the movement and imagining itself to be a part of
the action.
\par But on a farther view we find that this determinism is not so complete as it seemed; action of Nature
continues and is what it is because of the sanction of the Purusha. The regarding Purusha sees that he supports
and in some way fills and pervades the action with his conscious being. He discovers that without him it could not
continue and that where he persistently withdraws this sanction, the habitual action becomes gradually enfeebled,
flags and ceases. His whole active mentality can be thus brought to a complete stillness. There is yet a passive
mentality which mechanically continues, but this too can be stilled by his withdrawal into himself out of the
action. Even then the life action in its most mechanical parts continues; but that too can be stilled into cessation.
It would appear then that he is not only the upholding (\s{bhart\,r}) Purusha, but in some way the master of his
nature, Ishwara. It was the consciousness of this sanctioning control, this necessity of his consent, which made
him in the ego-sense conceive of himself as a soul or mental being with a free will determining all his own
becomings. Yet the free-will seems to be imperfect, almost illusory, since the actual will itself is a machinery of
Nature and each separate willing determined by the stream of past action and the sum of conditions it created,
Page 636

—although, because the result of the stream, the sum, is at each moment a new development, a new
determination, it may seem to be a self-born willing, virginally creative at each moment. What he contributed all
the while was a consent behind, a sanction to what Nature was doing. He does not seem able to rule her entirely,
but only choose between certain well-defined possibilities: there is in her a power of resistance born of her past
impetus and a still greater power of resistance born of the sum of fixed conditions she has created, which she
presents to him as a set of permanent laws to be obeyed. He cannot radically alter her way of proceeding,
cannot freely effect his will from within her present movement, nor, while standing in the mentality, get outside or
above her in such a way as to exercise a really free control. There is a duality of dependence, her dependence
on his consent, his dependence on her law and way and limits of action, determination denied by a sense of
free-will, free-will nullified by the actuality of natural determination. He is sure that she is his power, but yet he
seems to be subject to her. He is the sanctioning (\s{anumant\,r}) Purusha, but does not seem to be the absolute
lord, Ishwara.
\par Nevertheless, there is somewhere an absolute control, a real Ishwara. He is aware of it and knows that if he
can find it, he will enter into control, become not only the passive sanctioning witness and upholding soul of her
will, but the free powerful user and determiner of her movements. But this control seems to belong to another
poise than the mentality. Sometimes he finds himself using it, but as a channel or instrument; it comes to him
from above. It is clear then that it is supramental, a power of the Spirit greater than mental being which he
already knows himself to be at the summit and in the secret core of his conscious being. To enter into identity
with that Spirit must then be his way to control and lordship. He can do it passively by a sort of reflection and
receiving in his mental consciousness, but then he is only a mould, channel or instrument, not a possessor or
participant in the power. He can arrive at identity by an absorption of his mentality in inner spiritual being, but
then the conscious action ceases in a trance of identity. To be active master
Page 637

of the nature he must evidently rise to some higher supramental poise where there is possible not only a passive,
but an active identity with the controlling spirit. To find the way of rising to this greater poise and be self-ruler,
Swarat, is a condition of his perfection.
\par The difficulty of the ascent is due to a natural ignorance. He is the Purusha, witness of mental and physical
Nature, \s{s\=ak\,s\=i}, but not a complete knower of self and Nature, \s{j\~n\=at\,r}. Knowledge in the mentality is
enlightened by his consciousness; he is the mental knower; but he finds that this is not a real knowledge, but only
a partial seeking and partial finding, a derivative uncertain reflection and narrow utilisation for action from a
greater light beyond which is the real knowledge. This light is the self-awareness and all-awareness of Spirit.
The essential self-awareness he can arrive at even on the mental plane of being, by reflection in the soul of mind
or by its absorption in spirit, as indeed it can be arrived at by another kind of reflection or absorption in soul of life
and soul of body. But for participation in an effective all-awareness with this essential self-awareness as the soul
of its action he must rise to supermind. To be lord of his being, he must be knower of self and Nature, \s{j\~n\=at\=a
\=i\'svara\,h}. Partially this may be done on a higher level of mind where it responds directly to supermind, but really
and completely this perfection belongs not to the mental being, but to the ideal or knowledge Soul, \s{vij\~n\=anamaya
puru\,sa}. To draw up the mental into the greater knowledge being and that into the Bliss-Self of the spirit,
\s{\=anandamaya puru\,sa}, is the uttermost way of this perfection.
\par But no perfection, much less this perfection can be attained without a very radical dealing with the present
nature and the abrogation of much that seems to be the fixed law of its complex nexus of mental, vital and
physical being. The law of this nexus has been created for a definite and limited end, the temporary maintenance,
preservation, possession, aggrandisement, enjoyment, experience, need, action of the mental ego in the living
body. Other resultant uses are served, but this is the immediate and fundamentally determining object and utility.
To arrive at
Page 638

a higher utility and freer instrumentation this nexus must be partly broken up, exceeded, transformed into a larger
harmony of action. The Purusha sees that the law created is that of a partly stable, partly unstable selective
determination of habitual, yet developing experiences out of a first confused consciousness of self and not-self,
subjective being and external universe. This determination is managed by mind, life and body acting upon each
other, in harmony and correspondence, but also in discord and divergence, mutual interference and limitation.
There is a similar mixed harmony and discord between various activities of the mind in itself, as also between
activities of the life in itself and of the physical being. The whole is a sort of disorderly order, an order evolved
and contrived out of a constantly surrounding and invading confusion.
\par This is the first difficulty the Purusha has to deal with, a mixed and confused action of Nature,—an action
without clear self-knowledge, distinct motive, firm instrumentation, only an attempt at these things and a general
relative success of effectuality,—a surprising effect of adaptation in some directions, but also much distress of
inadequacy. That mixed and confused \NH action has to be mended; purification is an essential means towards
self-perfection. All these impurities and inadequacies result in various kinds of limitation and bondage: but there
are two or three primary knots of the bondage,—ego is the principal knot,—from which the others derive. These
bonds must be got rid of; purification is not complete till it brings about liberation. Besides, after a certain
purification and liberation has been effected, there is still the conversion of the purified instruments to the law of
a higher object and utility, a large, real and perfect order of action. By the conversion man can arrive at a certain
perfection of fullness of being, calm, power and knowledge, even a greater vital action and more perfect physical
existence. One result of this perfection is a large and perfected delight of being, Ananda. Thus purification,
liberation, perfection, delight of being are four constituent elements of the Yoga,—\s{\'suddhi}, \s{mukti},
\s{siddhi}, \s{bhukti}.
\par But this perfection cannot be attained or cannot be secure
Page 639

and entire in its largeness if the Purusha lays stress on individuality. To abandon identification with the physical,
vital and mental ego, is not enough; he must arrive in soul also at a true, universalised, not separative individuality.
In the lower nature man is an ego making a clean cut in conception between himself and all other existence; the
ego is to him self, but all the rest not self, external to his being. His whole action starts from and is founded upon
this self-conception and world-conception. But the conception is in fact an error. However sharply he
individualises himself in mental idea and mental or other action, he is inseparable from the universal being, his
body from universal force and matter, his life from the universal life, his mind from universal mind, his soul and
spirit from universal soul and spirit. The universal acts on him, invades him, overcomes him, shapes itself in him
at every moment; he in his reaction acts on the universal, invades, tries to impose himself on it, shape it,
overcome its attack, rule and use its instrumentation.
\par This conflict is a rendering of the underlying unity, which assumes the aspect of struggle by a necessity of
the original separation; the two pieces into which mind has cut the oneness, rush upon each other to restore the
oneness and each tries to seize on and take into itself the separated portion. Universe seems to be always trying
to swallow up man, the infinite to resume this finite which stands on its self-defence and even replies by
aggression. But in real fact the universal being through this apparent struggle is working out its purpose in man,
though the key and truth of the purpose and working is lost to his superficial conscious mind, only held obscurely
in an underlying subconscient and only known luminously in an overruling superconscient unity. Man also is
impelled towards unity by a constant impulse of extension of his ego, which identifies itself as best it can with
other egos and with such portions of the universe as he can physically, vitally, mentally get into his use and
possession. As man aims at knowledge and mastery of his own being, so also he aims at knowledge and mastery
of the environmental world of nature, its objects, its instrumentation, its beings. First he tries to effect this aim by
egoistic possession, but, as he develops,
Page 640

the element of sympathy born of the secret oneness grows in him and he arrives at the idea of a widening
cooperation and oneness with other beings, a harmony with universal Nature and universal being.
\par The witness Purusha in the mind observes that the inadequacy of his effort, all the inadequacy in fact of
man's life and nature arises from the separation and the consequent struggle, want of knowledge, want of
harmony, want of oneness. It is essential for him to grow out of separative individuality, to universalise himself, to
make himself one with the universe. This unification can be done only through the soul by making our soul of
mind one with the universal Mind, our soul of life one with the universal Life-soul, our soul of body one with the
universal soul of physical Nature. When this can be done, in proportion to the power, intensity, depth,
completeness, permanence with which it can be done, great effects are produced upon the natural action.
Especially there grows an immediate and profound sympathy and immixture of mind with mind, life with life, a
lessening of the body's insistence on separateness, a power of direct mental and other intercommunication and
effective mutual action which helps out now the inadequate indirect communication and action that was till now
the greater part of the conscious means used by embodied mind. But still the Purusha sees that in mental, vital,
physical nature, taken by itself, there is always a defect, inadequacy, confused action, due to the mechanically
unequal interplay of the three modes or gunas of Nature. To transcend it he has in the universality too to rise to
the supramental and spiritual, to be one with the supramental soul of cosmos, the universal spirit. He arrives at
the larger light and order of a higher principle in himself and the universe which is the characteristic action of the
divine Sachchidananda. Even, he is able to impose the influence of that light and order, not only on his own
natural being, but, within the radius and to the extent of the Spirit's action in him, on the world he lives in, on that
which is around him. He is \s{svar\=a\,t}, self-knower, self-ruler, but he begins to be also through this spiritual
oneness and transcendence \s{samr\=a\,t}, a knower and master of his environing world of being.
Page 641

\par In this self-development the soul finds that it has accomplished on this line the object of the whole integral
Yoga, union with the Supreme in its self and in its universalised individuality. So long as he remains in the
world-existence, this perfection must radiate out from him,—for that is the necessity of his oneness with the
universe and its beings,—in an influence and action which help all around who are capable of it to rise to or
advance towards the same perfection, and for the rest in an influence and action which help, as only the
self-ruler and master man can help, in leading the human race forward spiritually towards this consummation and
towards some image of a greater divine truth in their personal and communal existence. He becomes a light and
power of the Truth to which he has climbed and a means for others' ascension.
Page 642

\par
\hn Chapter V
\par
\ht The Instruments of the Spirit
\par\drop If there is to be an active perfection of our being, the first necessity is a purification of the working of
the instruments which it now uses for a music of discords. The being itself, the spirit, the divine Reality in man
stands in no need of purification; it is for ever pure, not affected by the faults of its instrumentation or the
stumblings of mind and heart and body in their work, as the sun, says the Upanishad, is not touched or stained by
the faults of the eye of vision. Mind, heart, the soul of vital desire, the life in the body are the seats of impurity; it
is they that must be set right if the working of the spirit is to be a perfect working and not marked by its present
greater or less concession to the devious pleasure of the lower nature. What is ordinarily called purity of the
being, is either a negative whiteness, a freedom from sin gained by a constant inhibition of whatever action,
feeling, idea or will we think to be wrong, or else, the highest negative or passive purity, the entire God-content,
inaction, the complete stilling of the vibrant mind and the soul of desire, which in quietistic disciplines leads to a
supreme peace; for then the spirit appears in all the eternal purity of its immaculate essence. That gained, there
would be nothing farther to be enjoyed or done. But here we have the more difficult problem of a total, unabated,
even an increased and more powerful action founded on perfect bliss of the being, the purity of the soul's
instrumental as well as the spirit's essential nature. Mind, heart, life, body are to do the works of the Divine, all
the works which they do now and yet more, but to do them divinely, as now they do not do them. This is the first
appearance of the problem before him on which the seeker of perfection has to lay hold, that it is not a negative,
prohibitory, passive or quietistic, but a positive, affirmative, active purity which is his object. A divine quietism
discovers the immaculate eternity of the Spirit, a divine kinetism
Page 643

adds to it the right pure undeviating action of the soul, mind and body.
\par Moreover, it is a total purification of all the complex instrumentality in all the parts of each instrument that is
demanded of us by the integral perfection. It is not, ultimately, the narrower moral purification of the ethical
nature. Ethics deals only with the desire-soul and the active outward dynamical part of our being; its field is
confined to character and action. It prohibits and inhibits certain actions, certain desires, impulses,
propensities,—it inculcates certain qualities in the act, such as truthfulness, love, charity, compassion, chastity.
When it has got this done and assured a base of virtue, the possession of a purified will and blameless habit of
action, its work is finished. But the Siddha of the integral perfection has to dwell in a larger plane of the Spirit's
eternal purity beyond good and evil. By this phrase it is not meant, as the rash hastily concluding intellect would
be prone to imagine, that he will do good and evil indifferently and declare that to the spirit there is no difference
between them, which would be in the plane of individual action an obvious untruth and might serve to cover a
reckless self-indulgence of the imperfect human nature. Neither is it meant that since good and evil are in this
world inextricably entangled together, like pain and pleasure,—a proposition which, however true at the moment
and plausible as a generalisation, need not be true of the human being's greater spiritual evolution,—the liberated
man will live in the spirit and stand back from the mechanical continued workings of a necessarily imperfect
nature. This, however possible as a stage towards a final cessation of all activity, is evidently not a counsel of
active perfection. But it is meant that the Siddha of the active integral perfection will live dynamically in the
working of the transcendent power of the divine Spirit as a universal will through the supermind individualised in
him for action. His works will therefore be the works of an eternal Knowledge, an eternal Truth, an eternal
Might, an eternal Love, an eternal Ananda; but the truth, knowledge, force, love, delight will be the whole
essential spirit of whatever work he will do and will not depend on its form; they will determine his
Page 644

action from the spirit within and the action will not determine the spirit or subject it to a fixed standard or rigid
mould of working. He will have no dominant mere habit of character, but only a spiritual being and will with at
the most a free and flexible temperamental mould for the action. His life will be a direct stream from the eternal
fountains, not a form cut to some temporary human pattern. His perfection will not be a sattwic purity, but a thing
uplifted beyond the gunas of Nature, a perfection of spiritual knowledge, spiritual power, spiritual delight, unity
and harmony of unity; the outward perfection of his works will be freely shaped as the self-expression of this
inner spiritual transcendence and universality. For this change he must make conscient in him that power of spirit
and supermind which is now superconscient to our mentality. But that cannot work in him so long as his present
mental, vital, physical being is not liberated from its actual inferior working. This purification is the first necessity.
\par In other words, purification must not be understood in any limited sense of a selection of certain outward
kinetic movements, their regulation, the inhibition of other action or a liberation of certain forms of character or
particular mental and moral capacities. These things are secondary signs of our derivative being, not essential
powers and first forces. We have to take a wider psychological view of the primary forces of our nature. We
have to distinguish the formed parts of our being, find out their basic defect of impurity or wrong action and
correct that, sure that the rest will then come right naturally. We have not to doctor symptoms of impurity, or that
only secondarily, as a minor help,—but to strike at its roots after a deeper diagnosis. We then find that there are
two forms of impurity which are at the root of the whole confusion. One is a defect born of the nature of our
past evolution, which has been a nature of separative ignorance; this defect is a radically wrong and ignorant
form given to the proper action of each part of our instrumental being. The other impurity is born of the
successive process of an evolution, where life emerges in and depends on body, mind emerges in and depends on
life in the body, supermind emerges in and lends
Page 645

itself to instead of governing mind, soul itself is apparent only as a circumstance of the bodily life of the mental
being and veils up the spirit in the lower imperfections. This second defect of our nature is caused by this
dependence of the higher on the lower parts; it is an immixture of functions by which the impure working of the
lower instrument gets into the characteristic action of the higher function and gives to it an added imperfection of
embarrassment, wrong direction and confusion.
\par Thus the proper function of the life, the vital force, is enjoyment and possession, both of them perfectly
legitimate, because the Spirit created the world for Ananda, enjoyment and possession of the many by the One,
of the One by the many and of the many too by the many; but,—this is an instance of the first kind of
defect,—the separative ignorance gives to it the wrong form of desire and craving which vitiates the whole
enjoyment and possession and imposes on it its opposites, want and suffering. Again, because mind is entangled
in life from which it evolves, this desire and craving get into the action of the mental will and knowledge; that
makes the will a will of craving, a force of desire instead of a rational will and a discerning force of intelligent
effectuation, and it distorts the judgment and reason so that we judge and reason according to our desires and
prepossessions and not with the disinterested impartiality of a pure judgment and the rectitude of a reason which
seeks only to distinguish truth and understand rightly the objects of its workings. That is an example of immixture.
These two kinds of defect, wrong form of action and illegitimate mixture of action, are not limited to these signal
instances, but belong to each instrument and to each combination of their functionings. They pervade the whole
economy of our nature. They are fundamental defects of our lower instrumental nature, and if we can set them
right, we shall get our instrumental being into a state of purity, enjoy the clarity of a pure will, a pure heart of
emotion, a pure enjoyment of our vitality, a pure body. That will be a preliminary, a human perfection, but it can
be made the basis and open out in its effort of self-attainment into the greater, the divine perfection.
\par Mind, life and body are the three powers of our lower
Page 646

\NH nature. But they cannot be taken quite separately because the life acts as a link and gives its character to
body and to a great extent to our mentality. Our body is a living body; the life-force mingles in and determines all
its functionings. Our mind too is largely a mind of life, a mind of physical sensation; only in its higher functions is
it normally capable of something more than the workings of a physical mentality subjected to life. We may put it
in this ascending order. We have first a body supported by the physical life-force, the physical prana which
courses through the whole nervous system and gives its stamp to our corporeal action, so that all is of the
character of the action of a living and not an inert mechanical body. Prana and physicality together make the
gross body, \s{sth\=ula \'sar\=ira}. This is only the outer instrument, the nervous force of life acting in the form of
body with its gross physical organs. Then there is the inner instrument, \s{anta\,hkara\,na}, the conscious mentality.
This inner instrument is divided by the old system into four powers; \s{citta} or basic mental consciousness;
\s{manas}, the sense mind; \s{buddhi}, the intelligence; \s{aha\.nk\=ara}, the ego-idea. The classification may serve
as a starting-point, though for a greater practicality we have to make certain farther distinctions. This mentality is
pervaded by the life-force, which becomes here an instrument for psychic consciousness of life and psychic
action on life. Every fibre of the sense mind and basic consciousness is shot through with the action of this
psychic prana, it is a nervous or vital and physical mentality. Even the buddhi and ego are overpowered by it,
although they have the capacity of raising the mind beyond subjection to this vital, nervous and physical
psychology. This combination creates in us the sensational desire-soul which is the chief obstacle to a higher
human as well as to the still greater divine perfection. Finally, above our present conscious mentality is a secret
supermind which is the proper means and native seat of that perfection.
\par Chitta, the basic consciousness, is largely subconscient; it has, open and hidden, two kinds of action, one
passive or receptive, the other active or reactive and formative. As a passive power it receives all impacts, even
those of which the mind is
Page 647

unaware or to which it is inattentive, and it stores them in an immense reserve of passive subconscient memory
on which the mind as an active memory can draw. But ordinarily the mind draws only what it had observed and
understood at the time,—more easily what it had observed well and understood carefully, less easily what it had
observed carelessly or ill understood; at the same time there is a power in consciousness to send up to the active
mind for use what that mind had not at all observed or attended to or even consciously experienced. This power
only acts observably in abnormal conditions, when some part of the subconscious chitta comes as it were to the
surface or when the subliminal being in us appears on the threshold and for a time plays some part in the outer
chamber of mentality where the direct intercourse and commerce with the external world takes place and our
inner dealings with ourselves develop on the surface. This action of memory is so fundamental to the entire
mental action that it is sometimes said, memory is the man. Even in the submental action of the body and life,
which is full of this subconscient chitta, though not under the control of the conscious mind, there is a vital and
physical memory. The vital and physical habits are largely formed by this submental memory. For this reason
they can be changed to an indefinite extent by a more powerful action of conscious mind and will, when that can
be developed and can find means to communicate to the subconscient chitta the will of the spirit for a new law of
vital and physical action. Even, the whole constitution of our life and body may be described as a bundle of habits
formed by the past evolution in Nature and held together by the persistent memory of this secret consciousness.
For chitta, the primary stuff of consciousness, is like prana and body universal in Nature, but is subconscient and
mechanical in nature of Matter.
\par But in fact all action of the mind or inner instrument arises out of this chitta or basic consciousness, partly
conscient, partly subconscient or subliminal to our active mentality. When it is struck by the world's impacts from
outside or urged by the reflective powers of the subjective inner being, it throws up certain habitual activities, the
mould of which has been determined by
Page 648

our evolution. One of these forms of activity is the emotional mind,—the heart, as we may call it for the sake of
a convenient brevity. Our emotions are the waves of reaction and response which rise up from the basic
consciousness, \sforced{citta-v\,rtti}. Their action too is largely regulated by habit and an emotive memory. They
are not imperative, not laws of Necessity; there is no really binding law of our emotional being to which we must
submit without remedy; we are not obliged to give responses of grief to certain impacts upon the mind, responses
of anger to others, to yet others responses of hatred or dislike, to others responses of liking or love. All these
things are only habits of our affective mentality; they can be changed by the conscious will of the spirit; they can
be inhibited; we may even rise entirely above all subjection to grief, anger, hatred, the duality of liking and
disliking. We are subject to these things only so long as we persist in subjection to the mechanical action of the
chitta in the emotive mentality, a thing difficult to get rid of because of the power of past habit and especially the
importunate insistence of the vital part of mentality, the nervous life-mind or psychic prana. This nature of the
emotive mind as a reaction of chitta with a certain close dependence upon the nervous life sensations and the
responses of the psychic prana is so characteristic that in some languages it is called chitta and prana, the heart,
the life soul; it is indeed the most directly agitating and powerfully insistent action of the desire-soul which the
immixture of vital desire and responsive consciousness has created in us. And yet the true emotive soul, the real
psyche in us, is not a desire-soul, but a soul of pure love and delight; but that, like the rest of our true being, can
only emerge when the deformation created by the life of desire is removed from the surface and is no longer the
characteristic action of our being. To get that done is a necessary part of our purification, liberation, perfection.
\par The nervous action of the psychic prana is most obvious in our purely sensational mentality. This nervous
mentality pursues indeed all the action of the inner instrument and seems often to form the greater part of things
other than sensation. The emotions are especially assailed and have the pranic stamp; fear
Page 649

is more even of a nervous sensation than an emotion, anger is largely or often a sensational response translated
into terms of emotion. Other feelings are more of the heart, more inward, but they ally themselves to the nervous
and physical longings or outward-going impulses of the psychic prana. Love is an emotion of the heart and may
be a pure feeling,—all mentality, since we are embodied minds, must produce, even thought produces, some kind
of life effect and some response in the stuff of body, but they need not for that reason be of a physical
nature,—but the heart's love allies itself readily with a vital desire in the body. This physical element may be
purified of that subjection to physical desire which is called lust, it may become love using the body for a physical
as well as a mental and spiritual nearness; but love may, too, separate itself from all, even the most innocent
physical element, or from all but a shadow of it, and be a pure movement to union of soul with soul, psyche with
psyche. Still the proper action of the sensational mind is not emotion, but conscious nervous response and
nervous feeling and affection, impulse of the use of physical sense and body for some action, conscious vital
craving and desire. There is a side of receptive response, a side of dynamic reaction. These things get their
proper normal use when the higher mind is not mechanically subject to them, but controls and regulates their
action. But a still higher state is when they undergo a certain transformation by the conscious will of the spirit
which gives its right and no longer its wrong or desire form of characteristic action to the psychic prana.
\par Manas, the sense mind, depends in our ordinary consciousness on the physical organs of receptive sense for
knowledge and on the organs of the body for action directed towards the objects of sense. The superficial and
outward action of the senses is physical and nervous in its character, and they may easily be thought to be
merely results of nerve-action; they are sometimes called in the old books \sforced{pr\=a\,nas}, nervous or life
activities. But still the essential thing in them is not the nervous excitation, but the consciousness, the action of the
chitta, which makes use of the organ and of the nervous impact of which it is the
Page 650

channel. Manas, sense-mind, is the activity, emerging from the basic consciousness, which makes up the whole
essentiality of what we call sense. Sight, hearing, taste, smell, touch are really properties of the mind, not of the
body; but the physical mind which we ordinarily use, limits itself to a translation into sense of so much of the
outer impacts as it receives through the nervous system and the physical organs. But the inner Manas has also a
subtle sight, hearing, power of contact of its own which is not dependent on the physical organs. And it has,
moreover, a power not only of direct communication of mind with object—leading even at a high pitch of action
to a sense of the contents of an object within or beyond the physical range,—but direct communication also of
mind with mind. Mind is able too to alter, modify, inhibit the incidence, values, intensities of sense impacts. These
powers of the mind we do not ordinarily use or develop; they remain subliminal and emerge sometimes in an
irregular and fitful action, more readily in some minds than in others, or come to the surface in abnormal states of
the being. They are the basis of clairvoyance, clairaudience, transference of thought and impulse, telepathy, most
of the more ordinary kinds of occult powers,—so called, though these are better described less mystically as
powers of the now subliminal action of the Manas. The phenomena of hypnotism and many others depend upon
the action of this subliminal sense-mind; not that it alone constitutes all the elements of the phenomena, but it is
the first supporting means of intercourse, communication and response, though much of the actual operation
belongs to an inner Buddhi. Mind physical, mind supraphysical,—we have and can use this double sense
mentality.
\par Buddhi is a construction of conscious being which quite exceeds its beginnings in the basic chitta; it is the
intelligence with its power of knowledge and will. Buddhi takes up and deals with all the rest of the action of the
mind and life and body. It is in its nature thought-power and will-power of the Spirit turned into the lower form of
a mental activity. We may distinguish three successive gradations of the action of this intelligence. There is first
an inferior perceptive understanding which simply takes
Page 651

up, records, understands and responds to the communications of the sense-mind, memory, heart and sensational
mentality. It creates by their means an elementary thinking mind which does not go beyond their data, but
subjects itself to their mould and rings out their repetitions, runs round and round in the habitual circle of thought
and will suggested by them or follows, with an obedient subservience of the reason to the suggestions of life, any
fresh determinations which may be offered to its perception and conception. Beyond this elementary
understanding, which we all use to an enormous extent, there is a power of arranging or selecting reason and
will-force of the intelligence which has for its action and aim an attempt to arrive at a plausible, sufficient, settled
ordering of knowledge and will for the use of an intellectual conception of life.
\par In spite of its more purely intellectual character this secondary or intermediate reason is really pragmatic in
its intention. It creates a certain kind of intellectual structure, frame, rule into which it tries to cast the inner and
outer life so as to use it with a certain mastery and government for the purposes of some kind of rational will. It
is this reason which gives to our normal intellectual being our set aesthetic and ethical standards, our structures
of opinion and our established norms of idea and purpose. It is highly developed and takes the primacy in all men
of an at all developed understanding. But beyond it there is a reason, a highest action of the buddhi which
concerns itself disinterestedly with a pursuit of pure truth and right knowledge; it seeks to discover the real Truth
behind life and things and our apparent selves and to subject its will to the law of Truth. Few, if any of us, can
use this highest reason with any purity, but the attempt to do it is the topmost capacity of the inner instrument, the
\s{anta\,hkara\,na}.
\par Buddhi is really an intermediary between a much higher Truth-mind not now in our active possession, which
is the direct instrument of Spirit, and the physical life of the human mind evolved in body. Its powers of
intelligence and will are drawn from this greater direct Truth-mind or supermind. Buddhi \NH centres its mental
action round the ego-idea, the idea that I am
Page 652

this mind, life and body or am a mental being determined by their action. It serves this ego-idea whether limited
by what we call egoism or extended by sympathy with the life around us. An ego-sense is created which reposes
on the separative action of the body, of the individualised life, of the mind-responses, and the ego-idea in the
buddhi centralises the whole action of this ego's thought, character, personality. The lower understanding and the
intermediary reason are instruments of its desire of experience and self-enlargement. But when the highest
reason and will develop, we can turn towards that which these outward things mean to the higher spiritual
consciousness. The “I” can then be seen as a mental reflection of the Self, the Spirit, the Divine, the one
existence transcendent, universal, individual in its multiplicity; the consciousness in which these things meet,
become aspects of one being and assume their right relations, can then be unveiled out of all these physical and
mental coverings. When the transition to supermind takes place, the powers of the Buddhi do not perish, but have
all to be converted to their supramental values. But the consideration of the supermind and the conversion of the
buddhi belongs to the question of the higher siddhi or divine perfection. At present we have to consider the
purification of the normal being of man, preparatory to any such conversion, which leads to the liberation from
the bonds of our lower nature.
Page 653

\par
\hn Chapter VI
\par
\ht Purification—The Lower Mentality
\par\drop We have to deal with the complex action of all these instruments and set about their purification. And
the simplest way will be to fasten on the two kinds of radical defect in each, distinguish clearly in what they
consist and set them right. But there is also the question where we are to begin. For the entanglement is great,
the complete purification of one instrument depends on the complete purification too of all the others, and that is
a great source of difficulty, disappointment and perplexity,—as when we think we have got the intelligence
purified, only to find that it is still subject to attack and overclouding because the emotions of the heart and the
will and sensational mind are still affected by the many impurities of the lower nature and they get back into the
enlightened buddhi and prevent it from reflecting the pure truth for which we are seeking. But we have on the
other hand this advantage that one important instrument sufficiently purified can be used as a means for the
purification of the others, one step firmly taken makes easier all the others and gets rid of a host of difficulties.
Which instrument then by its purification and perfection will bring about most easily and effectively or can aid
with a most powerful rapidity the perfection of the rest?
\par Since we are the spirit enveloped in mind, a soul evolved here as a mental being in a living physical body, it
must naturally be in the mind, the \sforced{anta\,hkara\,na}, that we must look for this desideratum. And in the
mind it is evidently by the buddhi, the intelligence and the will of the intelligence that the human being is intended
to do whatever work is not done for him by the physical or nervous nature as in the plant and the animal. Pending
the evolution of any higher supramental power the intelligent will must be our main force for effectuation and to
purify it becomes a very primary necessity. Once our \NH intelligence and will are well
Page 654

purified of all that limits them and gives them a wrong action or wrong direction, they can easily be perfected,
can be made to respond to the suggestions of Truth, understand themselves and the rest of the being, see clearly
and with a fine and scrupulous accuracy what they are doing and follow out the right way to do it without any
hesitating or eager \NH error or stumbling deviation. Eventually their response can be opened up to the perfect
discernings, intuitions, inspirations, revelations of the supermind and proceed by a more and more luminous and
even infallible action. But this purification cannot be effected without a preliminary clearing of its natural
obstacles in the other lower parts of the \s{anta\,hkara\,na}, and the chief natural obstacle running through the
whole action of the \sforced{anta\,hkara\,na}, through the sense, the mental sensation, emotion, dynamic impulse,
intelligence, will, is the intermiscence and the compelling claim of the psychic prana. This then must be dealt with,
its dominating intermiscence ruled out, its claim denied, itself quieted and prepared for purification.
\par Each instrument has, it has been said, a proper and legitimate action and also a deformation or wrong
principle of its proper action. The proper action of the psychic prana is pure possession and enjoyment,
\s{bhoga}. To enjoy thought, will, action, dynamic impulse, result of action, emotion, sense, sensation, to enjoy too
by their means objects, persons, life, the world, is the activity for which this prana gives us a psycho-physical
basis. A really perfect enjoyment of existence can only come when what we enjoy is not the world in itself or for
itself, but God in the world, when it is not things, but the Ananda of the spirit in things that forms the real,
essential object of our enjoying and things only as form and symbol of the spirit, waves of the ocean of Ananda.
But this Ananda can only come at all when we can get at and reflect in our members the hidden spiritual being,
and its fullness can only be had when we climb to the supramental ranges. Meanwhile there is a just and
permissible, a quite legitimate human enjoyment of these things, which is, to speak in the language of Indian
psychology, predominantly sattwic in its nature. It is an enlightened enjoyment principally by the perceptive,
aesthetic and emotive mind, secondarily only
Page 655

by the sensational, nervous and physical being, but all subject to the clear government of the buddhi, to a right
reason, a right will, a right reception of the life impacts, a right order, a right feeling of the truth, law, ideal sense,
beauty, use of things. The mind gets the pure taste of enjoyment of them, \s{rasa}, and rejects whatever is
perturbed, troubled and perverse. Into this acceptance of the clear and limpid \s{rasa}, the psychic prana has to
bring in the full sense of life and the occupying enjoyment by the whole being, \s{bhoga}, without which the
acceptance and possession by the mind, \sforced{rasa-graha\,na}, would not be concrete enough, would be too
tenuous to satisfy altogether the embodied soul. This contribution is its proper function.
\par The deformation which enters in and prevents the purity, is a form of vital craving; the grand deformation
which the psychic prana contributes to our being, is desire. The root of desire is the vital craving to seize upon
that which we feel we have not, it is the limited life's instinct for possession and satisfaction. It creates the sense
of want,—first the simpler vital craving of hunger, thirst, lust, then these psychical hungers, thirsts, lusts of the
mind which are a much greater and more instant and pervading affliction of our being, the hunger which is
infinite because it is the hunger of an infinite being, the thirst which is only temporarily lulled by satisfaction, but is
in its nature insatiable. The psychic prana invades the sensational mind and brings into it the unquiet thirst of
sensations, invades the dynamic mind with the lust of control, having, domination, success, fulfilment of every
impulse, fills the emotional mind with the desire for the satisfaction of liking and disliking, for the wreaking of love
and hate, brings the shrinkings and panics of fear and the strainings and disappointments of hope, imposes the
tortures of grief and the brief fevers and excitements of joy, makes the intelligence and intelligent will the
accomplices of all these things and turns them in their own kind into deformed and lame instruments, the will into
a will of craving and the intelligence into a partial, a stumbling and an eager pursuer of limited, impatient, militant
prejudgment and opinion. Desire is the root of all sorrow, disappointment, affliction, for though it has a feverish
joy of
Page 656

pursuit and satisfaction, yet because it is always a straining of the being, it carries into its pursuit and its getting a
labour, hunger, struggle, a rapid subjection to fatigue, a sense of limitation, dissatisfaction and early
disappointment with all its gains, a ceaseless morbid stimulation, trouble, disquiet, \s{a\'s\=anti}. To get rid of desire
is the one firm indispensable purification of the psychical prana,—for so we can replace the soul of desire with
its pervading immiscence in all our instruments by a mental soul of calm delight and its clear and limpid
possession of ourselves and world and Nature which is the crystal basis of the mental life and its perfection.
\par The psychical prana interferes in all the higher operations to deform them, but its defect is itself due to its
being interfered with and deformed by the nature of the physical workings in the body which Life has evolved in
its emergence from matter. It is that which has created the separation of the individual life in the body from the
life of the universe and stamped on it the character of want, limitation, hunger, thirst, craving for what it has not,
a long groping after enjoyment and a hampered and baffled need of possession. Easily regulated and limited in
the purely physical order of things, it extends itself in the psychical prana immensely and becomes, as the mind
grows, a thing with difficulty limited, insatiable, irregular, a busy creator of disorder and disease. Moreover, the
psychical prana leans on the physical life, limits itself by the nervous force of the physical being, limits thereby
the operations of the mind and becomes the link of its dependence on the body and its subjection to fatigue,
incapacity, disease, disorder, insanity, the pettiness, the precariousness and even the possible dissolution of the
workings of the physical mentality. Our mind instead of being a thing powerful in its own strength, a clear
instrument of conscious spirit, free and able to control, use and perfect the life and body, appears in the result a
mixed construction; it is a predominantly physical mentality limited by its physical organs and subject to the
demands and to the obstructions of the life in the body. This can only be got rid of by a sort of practical, inward
psychological operation of analysis by which we become aware of the mentality as a
Page 657

separate power, isolate it for a free working, distinguish too the psychical and the physical prana and make them
no longer a link for dependence, but a transmitting channel for the Idea and Will in the buddhi, obedient to its
suggestions and commands; the prana then becomes a passive means of effectuation for the mind's direct control
of the physical life. This control, however abnormal to our habitual poise of action, is not only possible,—it
appears to some extent in the phenomena of hypnosis, though these are unhealthily abnormal, because there it is
a foreign will which suggests and commands,—but must become the normal action when the higher Self within
takes up the direct command of the whole being. This control can be exercised perfectly, however, only from the
supramental level, for it is there that the true effective Idea and Will reside and the mental thought-mind, even
spiritualised, is only a limited, though it may be made a very powerful deputy.
\par Desire, it is thought, is the real motive power of human living and to cast it out would be to stop the springs
of life; satisfaction of desire is man's only enjoyment and to eliminate it would be to extinguish the impulse of life
by a quietistic asceticism. But the real motive power of the life of the soul is Will; desire is only a deformation of
will in the dominant bodily life and physical mind. The essential turn of the soul to possession and enjoyment of
the world consists in a will to delight, and the enjoyment of the satisfaction of craving is only a vital and physical
degradation of the will to delight. It is essential that we should distinguish between pure will and desire, between
the inner will to delight and the outer lust and craving of the mind and body. If we are unable to make this
distinction practically in the experience of our being, we can only make a choice between a life-killing asceticism
and the gross will to live or else try to effect an awkward, uncertain and precarious compromise between them.
This is in fact what the mass of men do; a small minority trample down the life instinct and strain after an ascetic
perfection; most obey the gross will to live with such modifications and restraints as society imposes or the
normal social man has been trained to impose on his own mind and actions;
Page 658

others set up a balance between ethical austerity and temperate indulgence of the desiring mental and vital self
and see in this balance the golden mean of a sane mind and healthy human living. But none of these ways gives
the perfection which we are seeking, the divine government of the will in life. To tread down altogether the
prana, the vital being, is to kill the force of life by which the large action of the embodied soul in the human being
must be supported; to indulge the gross will to live is to remain satisfied with imperfection; to compromise
between them is to stop half way and possess neither earth nor heaven. But if we can get at the pure will
undeformed by desire,—which we shall find to be a much more free, tranquil, steady and effective force than the
leaping, smoke-stifled, soon fatigued and baffled flame of desire,—and at the calm inner will of delight not
afflicted or limited by any trouble of craving, we can then transform the prana from a tyrant, enemy, assailant of
the mind into an obedient instrument. We may call these greater things, too, by the name of desire, if we choose,
but then we must suppose that there is a divine desire other than the vital craving, a God-desire of which this
other and lower phenomenon is an obscure shadow and into which it has to be transfigured. It is better to keep
distinct names for things which are entirely different in their character and inner action.
\par To rid the prana of desire and incidentally to reverse the ordinary poise of our nature and turn the vital being
from a troublesomely dominant power into the obedient instrument of a free and unattached mind, is then the first
step in purification. As this deformation of the psychical prana is corrected, the purification of the rest of the
intermediary parts of the \s{anta\,hkara\,na} is facilitated, and when that correction is completed, their purification
too can be easily made absolute. These intermediary parts are the emotional mind, the receptive sensational mind
and the active sensational mind or mind of dynamic impulse. They all hang together in a strongly knotted
interaction. The deformation of the emotional mind hinges upon the duality of liking and disliking, \s{r\=aga-dve\,sa},
emotional attraction and repulsion. All the complexity of our emotions and their tyranny
Page 659

over the soul arise from the habitual responses of the soul of desire in the emotions and sensations to these
attractions and repulsions. Love and hatred, hope and fear, grief and joy all have their founts in this one source.
We like, love, welcome, hope for, joy in whatever our nature, the first habit of our being, or else a formed (often
perverse) habit, the second nature of our being, presents to the mind as pleasant, \s{priyam}; we hate, dislike,
fear, have repulsion from or grief of whatever it presents to us as unpleasant, \s{apriyam}. This habit of the
emotional nature gets into the way of the intelligent will and makes it often a helpless slave of the emotional being
or at least prevents it from exercising a free judgment and government of the nature. This deformation has to be
corrected. By getting rid of desire in the psychic prana and its intermiscence in the emotional mind, we facilitate
the correction. For then attachment which is the strong bond of the heart, falls away from the heart-strings; the
involuntary habit of \s{r\=aga-dve\,sa} remains, but, not being made obstinate by attachment, it can be dealt with
more easily by the will and the intelligence. The restless heart can be conquered and get rid of the habit of
attraction and repulsion.
\par But then if this is done, it may be thought, as with regard to desire, that this will be the death of the emotional
being. It will certainly be so, if the deformation is eliminated but not replaced by the right action of the emotional
mind; the mind will then pass into a neutral condition of blank indifference or into a luminous state of peaceful
impartiality with no stir or wave of emotion. The former state is in no way desirable; the latter may be the
perfection of a quietistic discipline, but in the integral perfection which does not reject love or shun various
movement of delight, it can be no more than a stage which has to be overpassed, a preliminary passivity admitted
as a first basis for a right activity. Attraction and repulsion, liking and disliking are a necessary mechanism for the
normal man, they form a first principle of natural instinctive selection among the thousand flattering and
formidable, helpful and dangerous impacts of the world around him. The buddhi starts with this material to work
on and tries to correct the natural and instinctive by a wiser
Page 660

reasoned and willed selection; for obviously the pleasant is not always the right thing, the object to be preferred
and selected, nor the unpleasant the wrong thing, the object to be shunned and rejected; the pleasant and the
good, \s{preyas} and \s{\'sreyas}, have to be distinguished, and right reason has to choose and not the caprice of
emotion. But this it can do much better when the emotional suggestion is withdrawn and the heart rests in a
luminous passivity. Then too the right activity of the heart can be brought to the surface; for we find then that
behind this emotion-ridden soul of desire there was waiting all the while a soul of love and lucid joy and delight, a
pure psyche, which was clouded over by the deformations of anger, fear, hatred, repulsion and could not
embrace the world with an impartial love and joy. But the purified heart is rid of anger, rid of fear, rid of hatred,
rid of every shrinking and repulsion: it has a universal love, it can receive with an untroubled sweetness and
clarity the various delight which God gives it in the world. But it is not the lax slave of love and delight; it does not
desire, does not attempt to impose itself as the master of the actions. The selective process necessary to action is
left principally to the buddhi and, when the buddhi has been overpassed, to the spirit in the supramental will,
knowledge and Ananda.
\par The receptive sensational mind is the nervous mental basis of the affections; it receives mentally the impacts
of things and gives to them the responses of mental pleasure and pain which are the starting-point of the duality
of emotional liking and disliking. All the heart's emotions have a corresponding nervous-mental accompaniment,
and we often find that when the heart is freed of any will to the dualities, there still survives a root of disturbance
of nervous mind, or a memory in physical mind which falls more and more away to a quite physical character,
the more it is repelled by the will in the buddhi. It becomes finally a mere suggestion from outside to which the
nervous chords of the mind still occasionally respond until a complete purity liberates them into the same
luminous universality of delight which the pure heart already possesses. The active dynamic mind of impulse is
the lower organ or channel of responsive action; its deformation
Page 661

is a subjection to the suggestions of the impure emotional and sensational mentality and the desire of the prana, to
impulses to action dictated by grief, fear, hatred, desire, lust, craving, and the rest of the unquiet brood. Its right
form of action is a pure dynamic force of strength, courage, temperamental power, not acting for itself or in
obedience to the lower members, but as an impartial channel for the dictates of the pure intelligence and will or
the supramental Purusha. When we have got rid of these deformations and cleared the mentality for these truer
forms of action, the lower mentality is purified and ready for perfection. But that perfection depends on the
possession of a purified and enlightened buddhi; for the buddhi is the chief power in the mental being and the
chief mental instrument of the Purusha.
Page 662

\par
\hn Chapter VII
\par
\ht Purification—Intelligence and Will
\par\drop To purify the buddhi we must first understand its rather complex composition. And first we have to
make clear the distinction, ignored in ordinary speech, between the \s{manas}, mind, and \s{buddhi}, the
discerning intelligence and the \NH enlightened will. Manas is the sense mind. Man's initial mentality is not at all
a thing of reason and will; it is an animal, physical or sense mentality which constitutes its whole experience from
the impressions made on it by the external world and by its own embodied consciousness which responds to the
outward stimulus of this kind of experience. The buddhi only comes in as a secondary power which has in the
evolution taken the first place, but is still dependent on the inferior instrument it uses; it depends for its workings
on the sense mind and does what it can on its own higher range by a difficult, elaborate and rather stumbling
extension of knowledge and action from the physical or sense basis. A half-enlightened physical or sense
mentality is the ordinary type of the mind of man.
\par In fact the manas is a development from the external chitta; it is a first organising of the crude stuff of the
consciousness excited and aroused by external contacts, \s{b\=ahya-spar\'sa}. What we are physically is a soul
asleep in matter which has evolved to the partial wakefulness of a living body pervaded by a crude stuff of
external consciousness more or less alive and attentive to the outward impacts of the external world in which we
are developing our conscious being. In the animal this stuff of externalised consciousness organises itself into a
well-regulated mental sense or organ of perceiving and acting mind. Sense is in fact the mental contact of the
embodied consciousness with its surroundings. This contact is always essentially a mental phenomenon; but in
fact it depends chiefly upon the development of certain physical organs of contact with objects and with their
properties to whose
Page 663

images it is able by habit to give their mental values. What we call the physical senses have a double element, the
physical-nervous impression of the object and the mental-nervous value we give to it, and the two together make
up our seeing, hearing, smell, taste, touch with all those varieties of sensation of which they, and the touch
chiefly, are the starting-point or first transmitting agency. But the manas is able to receive sense impressions and
draw results from them by a direct transmission not dependent on the physical organ. This is more distinct in the
lower creation. Man, though he has really a greater capacity for this direct sense, the sixth sense in the mind, has
let it fall into abeyance by an exclusive reliance on the physical senses supplemented by the activity of the
buddhi.
\par The manas is therefore in the first place an organiser of sense experience; in addition it organises the natural
reactions of the will in the embodied consciousness and uses the body as an instrument, uses, as it is ordinarily
put, the organs of action. This natural action too has a double element, a physico-nervous impulse and behind it a
mental-nervous power-value of instinctive will-impulse. That makes up the nexus of first perceptions and actions
which is common to all developing animal life. But in addition there is in the manas or sense-mind a first resulting
thought-element which accompanies the operations of animal life. Just as the living body has a certain pervading
and possessing action of consciousness, \s{citta}, which forms into this sense-mind, so the sense-mind has in it a
certain pervading and possessing power which mentally uses the sense data, turns them into perceptions and first
ideas, associates experience with other experiences, and in some way or other thinks and feels and wills on the
sense basis.
\par This sensational thought-mind which is based upon sense, memory, association, first ideas and resultant
generalisations or secondary ideas, is common to all developed animal life and mentality. Man indeed has given it
an immense development and range and complexity impossible to the animal, but still, if he stopped there, he
would only be a more highly effective animal. He gets beyond the animal range and height because he
Page 664

has been able to disengage and separate to a greater or less extent his thought action from the sense mentality, to
draw back from the latter and observe its data and to act on it from above by a separated and partially freed
intelligence. The intelligence and will of the animal are involved in the sense-mind and therefore altogether
governed by it and carried on its stream of sensations, sense-perceptions, impulses; it is instinctive. Man is able to
use a reason and will, a self-observing, thinking and all-observing, an intelligently willing mind which is no longer
involved in the sense-mind, but acts from above and behind it in its own right, with a certain separateness and
freedom. He is reflective, has a certain relative freedom of intelligent will. He has liberated in himself and has
formed into a separate power the buddhi.
\par But what is this buddhi? From the point of view of Yogic knowledge we may say that it is that instrument of
the soul, of the inner conscious being in nature, of the Purusha, by which it comes into some kind of conscious
and ordered possession both of itself and its surroundings. Behind all the action of the chitta and manas there is
this soul, this Purusha; but in the lower forms of life it is mostly subconscient, asleep or half-awake, absorbed in
the mechanical action of Nature; but it becomes more and more awake and comes more and more forward as it
rises in the scale of life. By the activity of the buddhi it begins the process of an entire awakening. In the lower
actions of the mind the soul suffers Nature rather than possesses her; for it is there entirely a slave to the
mechanism which has brought it into conscious embodied experience. But in the buddhi we get to something, still
a natural instrumentation, by which yet Nature seems to be helping and arming the Purusha to understand,
possess and master her.
\par Neither understanding, possession nor mastery is complete, either because the buddhi in us is itself still
incomplete, only yet half developed and half formed, or because it is in its nature only an intermediary instrument
and before we can get complete knowledge and mastery, we must rise to something greater than the buddhi. Still
it is a movement by which we come to the knowledge that there is a power within us greater than the
Page 665

animal life, a truth greater than the first truths or appearances perceived by the sense-mind, and can try to get at
that truth and to labour towards a greater and more successful power of action and control, a more effective
government both of our own nature and the nature of things around us, a higher knowledge, a higher power, a
higher and larger enjoyment, a more exalted range of being. What then is the final object of this trend? Evidently,
it must be for the Purusha to get to the highest and fullest truth of itself and of things, greatest truth of soul or self
and greatest truth of Nature, and to an action and a status of being which shall be the result of or identical with
that Truth, the power of this greatest knowledge and the enjoyment of that greatest being and consciousness to
which it opens. This must be the final result of the evolution of the conscious being in Nature.
\par To arrive then at the whole truth of our self and Spirit and the knowledge, greatness, bliss of our free and
complete being must be the object of the purification, liberation and perfection of the buddhi. But it is a common
idea that this means not the full possession of Nature by the Purusha, but a rejection of Nature. We are to get at
self by the removal of the action of Prakriti. As the buddhi, coming to the knowledge that the sense-mind only
gives us appearances in which the soul is subject to Nature, discovers more real truths behind them, the soul
must arrive at this knowledge that the buddhi too, when turned upon Nature, can give us only appearances and
enlarge the subjection, and must discover behind them the pure truth of the Self. The Self is something quite
other than Nature and the buddhi must purify itself of attachment to and preoccupation with natural things; so
only can it discern and separate from them the pure Self and Spirit: the knowledge of the pure Self and Spirit is
the only real knowledge, Ananda of the pure Self and Spirit is the only spiritual enjoyment, the consciousness and
being of the pure Self and Spirit are the only real consciousness and being. Action and will must cease because
all action is of the Nature; the will to be pure Self and Spirit means the cessation of all will to action.
\par But while the possession of the being, consciousness, delight, power of the Self is the condition of
perfection,—for it is only
Page 666

by knowing and possessing and living in the truth of itself that the soul can become free and perfect,—we hold
that Nature is an eternal action and manifestation of the Spirit; Nature is not a devil's trap, a set of misleading
appearances created by desire, sense, life and mental will and intelligence, but these phenomena are hints and
indications and behind all of them is a truth of Spirit which exceeds and uses them. We hold that there must be
an inherent spiritual gnosis and will by which the secret Spirit in all knows its own truth, wills, manifests and
governs its own being in Nature; to arrive at that, at communion with it or participation in it, must be part of our
perfection. The object of the purification of the buddhi will then be to arrive at the possession of our own truth of
self-being, but also at the possession of the highest truth of our being in Nature. For that purpose we must first
purify the buddhi of all that makes it subject to the sense-mind and, that once done, purify it from its own
limitations and convert its inferior mental intelligence and will into the greater action of a spiritual will and
knowledge.
\par The movement of the buddhi to exceed the limits of the sense-mind is an effort already half accomplished in
the human evolution; it is part of the common operation of Nature in man. The original action of the
thought-mind, the intelligence and will in man, is a subject action. It accepts the evidence of the senses, the
commands of the life-cravings, instincts, desires, emotions, the impulses of the dynamic sense-mind and only tries
to give them a more orderly direction and effective success. But the man whose reason and will are led and
dominated by the lower mind, is an inferior type of human nature, and the part of our conscious being which
consents to this domination is the lowest part of our manhood. The higher action of the buddhi is to exceed and
control the lower mind, not indeed to get rid of it, but to raise all the action of which it is the first suggestion into
the nobler plane of will and intelligence. The impressions of the sense-mind are used by a thought which exceeds
them and which arrives at truths they do not give, ideative truths of thought, truths of philosophy and science; a
thinking, discovering, philosophic mind overcomes, rectifies and dominates the first mind of
Page 667

sense impressions. The impulsive reactive sensational mentality, the life-cravings and the mind of emotional
desire are taken up by the intelligent will and are overcome, are rectified and dominated by a greater ethical mind
which discovers and sets over them a law of right impulse, right desire, right emotion and right action. The
receptive, crudely enjoying sensational mentality, the emotional mind and life mind are taken up by the
intelligence and are overcome, rectified and dominated by a deeper, happier aesthetic mind which discovers and
sets above them a law of true delight and beauty. All these new formations are used by a general Power of the
intellectual, thinking and willing man in a soul of governing intellect, imagination, judgment, memory, volition,
discerning reason and ideal feeling which uses them for knowledge, self-development, experience, discovery,
creation, effectuation, aspires, strives, inwardly attains, endeavours to make a higher thing of the life of the soul
in Nature. The primitive desire-soul no longer governs the being. It is still a desire-soul, but it is repressed and
governed by a higher power, something which has manifested in itself the godheads of Truth, Will, Good, Beauty
and tries to subject life to them. The crude desire-soul and mind is trying to convert itself into an ideal soul and
mind, and the proportion in which some effect and harmony of this greater conscious being has been found and
enthroned, is the measure of our increasing humanity.
\par But this is still a very incomplete movement. We find that it progresses towards a greater completeness in
proportion as we arrive at two kinds of perfection; first, a greater and greater detachment from the control of the
lower suggestions; secondly, an increasing discovery of a self-existent Being, Light, Power and Ananda which
surpasses and transforms the normal humanity. The ethical mind becomes perfect in proportion as it detaches
itself from desire, sense suggestion, impulse, customary dictated action and discovers a self of Right, Love,
Strength and Purity in which it can live accomplished and make it the foundation of all its actions. The aesthetic
mind is perfected in proportion as it detaches itself from all its cruder pleasures and from outward conventional
canons of the aesthetic reason and discovers a
Page 668

self-existent self and spirit of pure and infinite Beauty and Delight which gives its own light and joy to the
material of the aesthesis. The mind of knowledge is perfected when it gets away from impression and dogma
and opinion and discovers a light of self-knowledge and intuition which illumines all the workings of the sense and
reason, all self-experience and world-experience. The will is perfected when it gets away from and behind its
impulses and its customary ruts of effectuation and discovers an inner power of the Spirit which is the source of
an intuitive and luminous action and an original harmonious creation. The movement of perfection is away from
all domination by the lower nature and towards a pure and powerful reflection of the being, power, knowledge
and delight of the Spirit and Self in the buddhi.
\par The Yoga of self-perfection is to make this double movement as absolute as possible. All immiscence of
desire in the buddhi is an impurity. The intelligence coloured by desire is an impure intelligence and it distorts
Truth; the will coloured by desire is an impure will and it puts a stamp of distortion, pain and imperfection upon
the soul's activity. All immiscence of the emotions of the soul of desire is an impurity and similarly distorts both
the knowledge and the action. All subjection of the buddhi to the sensations and impulses is an impurity. The
thought and will have to stand back detached from desire, troubling emotion, distracting or mastering impulse and
to act in their own right until they can discover a greater guide, a Will, Tapas or divine Shakti which will take the
place of desire and mental will and impulse, an Ananda or pure delight of the spirit and an illumined spiritual
knowledge which will express themselves in the action of that Shakti. This complete detachment, impossible
without an entire self-government, equality, calm, \s{\'sama}, \s{samat\=a}, \s{\'s\=anti}, is the surest step towards the
purification of the buddhi. A calm, equal and detached mind can alone reflect the peace or base the action of the
liberated spirit.
\par The buddhi itself is burdened with a mixed and impure action. When we reduce it to its own proper forms,
we find that it has three stages or elevations of its functioning. First,
Page 669

its lowest basis is a habitual, customary action which is a link between the higher reason and the sense-mind, a
kind of current understanding. This understanding is in itself dependent on the witness of the senses and the rule
of action which the reason deduces from the sense-mind's perception of and attitude to life. It is not capable of
itself forming pure thought and will, but it takes the workings of the higher reason and turns them into coin of
opinion and customary standard of thought or canon of action. When we perform a sort of practical analysis of
the thinking mind, cut away this element and hold back the higher reason free, observing and silent, we find that
this current understanding begins to run about in a futile circle, repeating all its formed opinions and responses to
the impressions of things, but incapable of any strong adaptation and initiation. As it feels more and more the
refusal of sanction from the higher reason, it begins to fail, to lose confidence in itself and its forms and habits, to
distrust the intellectual action and to fall into weakness and silence. The stilling of this current, running, circling,
repeating thought-mind is the principal part of that silencing of the thought which is one of the most effective
disciplines of Yoga.
\par But the higher reason itself has a first stage of dynamic, pragmatic intellectuality in which creation, action
and will are the real motive and thought and knowledge are employed to form basic constructions and
suggestions which are used principally for effectuation. To this pragmatic reason truth is only a formation of the
intellect effective for the action of the inner and the outer life. When we cut it away from the still higher reason
which seeks impersonally to reflect Truth rather than to create personally effective truth, we find then that this
pragmatic reason can originate, progress, enlarge the experience by dynamic knowledge, but it has to depend on
the current understanding as a pedestal and base and put its whole weight on life and becoming. It is in itself
therefore a mind of the Will to life and action, much more a mind of Will than a mind of knowledge: it does not
live in any assured and constant and eternal Truth, but in progressing and changing aspects of Truth which serve
the shifting forms of our life and becoming or, at the highest,
Page 670

help life to grow and progress. By itself this pragmatic mind can give us no firm foundation and no fixed goal; it
lives in the truth of the hour, not in any truth of eternity. But when purified of dependence on the customary
understanding, it is a great creator and in association with the highest mental reason it becomes a strong channel
and bold servant for the effectuation of Truth in life. The value of its work will depend on the value and the
power of the highest truth-seeking reason. But by itself it is a sport of Time and a bondslave of Life. The seeker
of the Silence has to cast it away from him; the seeker of the integral Divinity has to pass beyond it, to replace
and transform this thinking mind intent on Life by a greater effectuating spiritual Will, the Truth-Will of the spirit.
\par The third and noblest stage of the intellectual will and reason is an intelligence which seeks for some
universal reality or for a still higher self-existent Truth for its own sake and tries to live in that Truth. This is
primarily a mind of knowledge and only secondarily a mind of Will. In its excess of tendency it often becomes
incapable of Will except the one will to know; for action it is dependent on the aid of the pragmatic mind and
therefore man tends in action to fall away from the purity of the Truth his highest knowledge holds into a mixed,
inferior, inconstant and impure effectuation. The disparity, even when it is not an opposition, between knowledge
and will is one of the principal defects of the human buddhi. But there are other inherent limitations of all human
thinking. This highest Buddhi does not work in man in its own purity; it is assailed by the defects of the lower
mentality, continually clouded by it, distorted, veiled, and prevented or lamed in its own proper action. Purified as
much as may be from that habit of mental degradation, the human buddhi is still a power that searches for the
Truth, but is never in full or direct possession of it; it can only reflect truth of the spirit and try to make it its own
by giving it a limited mental value and a distinct mental body. Nor does it reflect integrally, but seizes either an
uncertain totality or else a sum of limited particulars. First it seizes on this or that partial reflection and by
subjection to the habit of customary mind turns it into a fixed
Page 671

imprisoning opinion; all new truth it judges from the standpoint it has thus formed and therefore puts on it the
colour of a limiting prejudgment. Release it as much as possible from this habit of limiting opinion, still it is subject
to another affliction, the demand of the pragmatic mind for immediate effectuation, which gives it no time to
proceed to larger truth, but fixes it by the power of effective realisation in whatever it has already judged, known
and lived. Freed from all these chains, the buddhi can become a pure and flexible reflector of Truth, adding light
to light, proceeding from realisation to realisation. It is then limited only by its own inherent limitations.
\par These limitations are mainly of two kinds. First, its realisations are only mental realisations; to get to the
Truth itself we have to go beyond the mental buddhi. Again, the nature of the mind prevents it from making an
effective unification of the truths it seizes. It can only put them side by side and see oppositions or effect some
kind of partial, executive and practical combination. But it finds finally that the aspects of the Truth are infinite
and that none of its intellectual forms are quite valid, because the spirit is infinite and in the spirit all is true, but
nothing in the mind can give the whole truth of the spirit. Either then the buddhi becomes a pure mirror of many
reflections, reflecting all truth that falls on it, but ineffective and when turned to action either incapable of
decision or chaotic, or it has to make a selection and act as if that partiality were the whole truth, though it knows
otherwise. It acts in a helpless limitation of Ignorance, though it may hold a Truth far greater than its action. On
the other hand, it may turn away from life and thought and seek to exceed itself and pass into the Truth beyond
it. This it may do by seizing on some aspect, some principle, some symbol or suggestion of reality and pushing
that to its absolute, all-absorbing, all-excluding term of realisation or by seizing on and realising some idea of
indeterminate Being or Non-Being from which all thought and life fall away into cessation. The buddhi casts
itself into a luminous sleep and the soul passes away into some ineffable height of spiritual being.
\par Therefore in dealing with the buddhi, we must either take
Page 672

one of these choices or else try the rarer adventure of lifting the soul from the mental being into the spiritual
gnosis to see what we can find in the very core of that supernal light and power. This gnosis contains the sun of
the divine Knowledge-Will burning in the heavens of the supreme conscious Being, to which the mental
intelligence and will are only a focus of diffused and deflected rays and reflections. That possesses the divine
unity and yet or rather therefore can govern the multiplicity and diversity: whatever selection, self-limitation,
combination it makes is not imposed on it by Ignorance, but is self-developed by a power of self-possessing
divine Knowledge. When the gnosis is gained, it can then be turned on the whole nature to divinise the human
being. It is impossible to rise into it at once; if that could be done, it would mean a sudden and violent
overshooting, a breaking or slipping through the gates of the Sun, \s{s\=uryasya dv\=ar\=a}, without near possibility of
return. We have to form as a link or bridge an intuitive or illuminated mind, which is not the direct gnosis, but in
which a first derivative body of the gnosis can form. This illumined mind will first be a mixed power which we
shall have to purify of all its mental dependence and mental forms so as to convert all willing and thinking into
thought-sight and truth-seeing will by an illumined discrimination, intuition, inspiration, revelation. That will be the
final purification of the intelligence and the preparation for the siddhi of the gnosis.
Page 673

\par
\hn Chapter VIII
\par
\ht The Liberation of the Spirit
\par\drop The purification of the mental being and the psychic prana—we will leave aside for the time the
question of the physical purification, that of the body and physical prana, though that too is necessary to an
integral perfection,—prepares the ground for a spiritual liberation. \s{\'Suddhi} is the condition for \s{mukti}. All
purification is a release, a delivery; for it is a throwing away of limiting, binding, obscuring imperfections and
confusions: purification from desire brings the freedom of the psychic prana, purification from wrong emotions
and troubling reactions the freedom of the heart, purification from the obscuring limited thought of the sense mind
the freedom of the intelligence, purification from mere intellectuality the freedom of the gnosis. But all this is an
instrumental liberation. The freedom of the soul, \s{mukti}, is of a larger and more essential character; it is an
opening out of mortal limitation into the illimitable immortality of the Spirit.
\par For certain ways of thinking liberation is a throwing off of all nature, a silent state of pure being, a nirvana or
extinction, a dissolution of the natural existence into some indefinable Absolute, \s{mok\,sa}. But an absorbed and
immersed bliss, a wideness of actionless peace, a release of self-extinction or a self-drowning in the Absolute is
not our aim. We shall give to the idea of liberation, \s{mukti}, only the connotation of that inner change which is
common to all experience of this kind, essential to perfection and indispensable to spiritual freedom. We shall find
that it then implies always two things, a rejection and an assumption, a negative and a positive side; the negative
movement of freedom is a liberation from the principal bonds, the master-knots of the lower soul-nature, the
positive side an opening or growth into the higher spiritual existence. But what are these master-knots—other
and deeper twistings than the instrumental knots of
Page 674

the mind, heart, psychic life-force? We find them pointed out for us and insisted on with great force and a
constant emphatic repetition in the Gita; they are four, desire, ego, the dualities and the three gunas of Nature;
for to be desireless, ego-less, equal of mind and soul and spirit and \s{nistraigu\,nya}, is in the idea of the Gita to
be free, \s{mukta}. We may accept this description; for everything essential is covered by its amplitude. On the
other hand, the positive sense of freedom is to be universal in soul, transcendently one in spirit with God,
possessed of the highest divine nature,—as we may say, like to God, or one with him in the law of our being.
This is the whole and full sense of liberation and this is the integral freedom of the spirit.
\par We have already had to speak of purification from the psychic desire of which the craving of the prana is
the evolutionary or, as we may put it, the practical basis. But this is in the mental and psychic nature; spiritual
desirelessness has a wider and more essential meaning: for desire has a double knot, a lower knot in the prana,
which is a craving in the instruments, and a very subtle knot in the soul itself with the buddhi as its first support or
\s{prati\,s\,th\=a}, which is the inmost origin of this mesh of our bondage. When we look from below, desire presents
itself to us as a craving of the life force which subtilises in the emotions into a craving of the heart and is farther
subtilised in the intelligence into a craving, preference, passion of the aesthetic, ethical, \NH dynamic or rational
turn of the buddhi. This desire is essential to the ordinary man; he cannot live or act as an individual without
knotting up all his action into the service of some kind of lower or higher craving, preference or passion. But
when we are able to look at desire from above, we see that what supports this instrumental desire is a will of the
spirit. There is a will, \s{tapas}, \s{\'sakti}, by which the secret spirit imposes on its outer members all their action
and draws from it an active delight of its being, an ananda, in which they very obscurely and imperfectly, if at all
consciously, partake. This tapas is the will of the transcendent spirit who creates the universal movement, of the
universal spirit who supports and informs it, of the free individual spirit who is the soul centre of its multiplicities.
It is one will, free in all these
Page 675

at once, comprehensive, harmonious, unified; we find it, when we live and act in the spirit, to be an effortless and
desireless, a spontaneous and illumined, a self-fulfilling and self-possessing, a satisfied and blissful will of the
spiritual delight of being.
\par But the moment the individual soul leans away from the universal and transcendent truth of its being, leans
towards ego, tries to make this will a thing of its own, a separate personal energy, that will changes its character:
it becomes an effort, a straining, a heat of force which may have its fiery joys of effectuation and of possession,
but has also its afflicting recoils and pain of labour. It is this that turns in each instrument into an intellectual,
emotional, dynamic, sensational or vital will of desire, wish, craving. Even when the instruments {\it per se} are
\NH purified of their own apparent initiative and particular kind of desire, this imperfect tapas may still remain,
and so long as it conceals the source or deforms the type of the inner action, the soul has not the bliss of liberty,
or can only have it by refraining from all action; even, if allowed to persist, it will rekindle the pranic or other
desires or at least throw a reminiscent shadow of them on the being. This spiritual seed or beginning of desire too
must be expelled, renounced, cast away: the sadhaka must either choose an active peace and complete inner
silence or lose individual initiation, \s{sa\.nkalp\=arambha}, in a unity with the universal will, the tapas of the divine
Shakti. The passive way is to be inwardly immobile, without effort, wish, expectation or any turn to action,
\s{ni\'sce\,s\,ta}, \s{an\=iha}, \s{nirapek\,sa}, \s{niv\,rtta}; the active way is to be thus immobile and impersonal in the
mind, but to allow the supreme Will in its spiritual purity to act through the purified instruments. Then, if the soul
abides on the level of the spiritualised mentality, it becomes an instrument only, but is itself without initiative or
action, \s{ni\,skriya}, \s{sarv\=arambha-parity\=ag\=i}. But if it rises to the gnosis, it is at once an instrument and a
participant in the bliss of the divine action and the bliss of the divine Ananda; it unifies in itself the \s{prak\,rti} and
the \s{puru\,sa}.
\par The ego turn, the separative turn of the being, is the fulcrum of the whole embarrassed labour of the
ignorance and the bondage. So long as one is not free from the ego sense, there
Page 676

can be no real freedom. The seat of the ego is said to be in the buddhi; it is an ignorance of the discriminating
mind and reason which discriminate wrongly and take the individuation of mind, life and body for a truth of
separative existence and are turned away from the greater reconciling truth of the oneness of all existence. At
any rate in man it is the ego idea which chiefly supports the falsehood of a separative existence; to get rid of this
idea, to dwell on the opposite idea of unity, of the one self, the one spirit, the one being of nature is therefore an
effective remedy; but it is not by itself absolutely effective. For the ego, though it supports itself by this ego idea,
\s{aham-buddhi}, finds its most powerful means for a certain obstinacy or passion of persistence in the normal
action of the sense-mind, the prana and the body. To cast out of us the ego idea is not entirely possible or not
entirely effective until these instruments have undergone purification; for, their action being persistently egoistic
and separative, the buddhi is carried away by them,—as a boat by winds on the sea, says the Gita,—the
knowledge in the intelligence is being constantly obscured or lost temporarily and has to be restored again, a very
labour of Sisyphus. But if the lower instruments have been purified of egoistic desire, wish, will, egoistic passion,
egoistic emotion and the buddhi itself of egoistic idea and preference, then the knowledge of the spiritual truth of
oneness can find a firm foundation. Till then, the ego takes all sorts of subtle forms and we imagine ourselves to
be free from it, when we are really acting as its instruments and all we have attained is a certain intellectual
poise which is not the true spiritual liberation. Moreover, to throw away the active sense of ego is not enough;
that may merely bring an inactive state of the mentality, a certain passive inert quietude of separate being may
take the place of the kinetic egoism, which is also not the true liberation. The ego sense must be replaced by a
oneness with the transcendental Divine and with universal being.
\par This necessity arises from the fact that the buddhi is only a \s{prati\,s\,th\=a} or chief support of the ego-sense in
its manifold play, \s{aha\.nk\=ara}; but in its source it is a degradation or deformation of a truth of our spiritual being.
The truth of being is that there is
Page 677

a transcendent existence, supreme self or spirit, a timeless soul of existence, an eternal, a Divine, or even we
may speak of it in relation to current mental ideas of the Godhead as a supra-Divine, which is here immanent,
all-embracing, all-initiating and all-governing, a great universal Spirit; and the individual is a conscious power of
being of the Eternal, capable eternally of relations with him, but one with him too in the very core of reality of its
own eternal existence. This is a truth which the intelligence can apprehend, can, when once purified, reflect,
transmit, hold in a derivative fashion, but it can only be entirely realised, lived and made effective in the spirit.
When we live in the spirit, then we not only know, but are this truth of our being. The individual then enjoys in the
spirit, in the bliss of the spirit, his oneness with the universal existence, his oneness with the timeless Divine and
his oneness with all other beings and that is the essential sense of a spiritual liberation from the ego. But the
moment the soul leans towards the mental limitation, there is a certain sense of spiritual separativeness which has
its joys, but may at any moment lapse into the entire ego-sense, ignorance, oblivion of oneness. To get rid of this
separativeness an attempt is made to absorb oneself in the idea and realisation of the Divine, and this takes in
certain forms of spiritual askesis the turn of a strain towards the abolition of all individual being and a casting
away, in the trance of immersion, of all individual or universal relations with the Divine, in others it becomes an
absorbed dwelling in him and not in this world or a continual absorbed or intent living in his presence, \s{s\=ayujya},
\s{s\=alokya}, \s{s\=am\=ipya mukti}. The way proposed for the integral Yoga is a lifting up and surrender of the
whole being to him, by which not only do we become one with him in our spiritual existence, but dwell too in him
and he in us, so that the whole nature is full of his presence and changed into the divine nature; we become one
spirit and consciousness and life and substance with the Divine and at the same time we live and move in and
have a various joy of that oneness. This integral liberation from the ego into the divine spirit and nature can only
be relatively complete on our present level, but it begins to become absolute as we open
Page 678

to and mount into the gnosis. This is the liberated perfection.
\par The liberation from ego, the liberation from desire together found the central spiritual freedom. The sense,
the idea, the experience that I am a separately self-existent being in the universe, and the forming of
consciousness and force of being into the mould of that experience are the root of all suffering, ignorance and
evil. And it is so because that falsifies both in practice and in cognition the whole real truth of things; it limits the
being, limits the consciousness, limits the power of our being, limits the bliss of being; this limitation again
produces a wrong way of existence, wrong way of consciousness, wrong way of using the power of our being
and consciousness, and wrong, perverse and contrary forms of the delight of existence. The soul limited in being
and self-isolated in its environment feels itself no longer in unity and harmony with its Self, with God, with the
universe, with all around it; but rather it finds itself at odds with the universe, in conflict and disaccord with other
beings who are its other selves, but whom it treats as not-self; and so long as this disaccord and disagreement
last, it cannot possess its world and it cannot enjoy the universal life, but is full of unease, fear, afflictions of all
kinds, in a painful struggle to preserve and increase itself and possess its surroundings,—for to possess its world
is the nature of infinite spirit and the necessary urge in all being. The satisfactions it gets from this labour and
effort are of a stinted, perverse and unsatisfying kind: for the one real satisfaction it has is that of growth, of an
increasing return towards itself, of some realisation of accord and harmony, of successful self-creation and
self-realisation, but the little of these things that it can achieve on the basis of ego-consciousness is always
limited, insecure, imperfect, transitory. It is at war too with its own self,—first because, since it is no longer in
possession of the central harmonising truth of its own being, it cannot properly control its natural members or
accord their tendencies, powers and demands; it has not the secret of harmony, because it has not the secret of
its own unity and self-possession; and, secondly, not being in possession of its highest self, it has to struggle
towards that, is not allowed to be at peace till it is in possession of its own
Page 679

true highest being. All this means that it is not at one with God; for to be at one with God is to be at one with
oneself, at one with the universe and at one with all beings. This oneness is the secret of a right and a divine
existence. But the ego cannot have it, because it is in its very nature separative and because even with regard to
ourselves, to our own psychological existence it is a false centre of unity; for it tries to find the unity of our being
in an identification with a shifting mental, vital, physical personality, not with the eternal self of our total
existence. Only in the spiritual self can we possess the true unity; for there the individual enlarges to his own
total being and finds himself one with universal existence and with the transcending Divinity.
\par All the trouble and suffering of the soul proceeds from this wrong egoistic and separative way of existence.
The soul not in possession of its free self-existence, \s{an\=atmav\=an}, because it is limited in its consciousness, is
limited in knowledge; and this limited knowledge takes the form of a falsifying knowledge. The struggle to return
to a true knowing is imposed upon it, but the ego in the separative mind is satisfied with shows and fragments of
knowledge which it pieces together into some false or some imperfect total or governing notion, and this
knowledge fails it and has to be abandoned for a fresh pursuit of the one thing to be known. That one thing is the
Divine, the Self, the Spirit in whom universal and individual being find at last their right foundation and their right
harmonies. Again, because it is limited in force, the ego-prisoned soul is full of many incapacities; wrong
knowledge is accompanied by wrong will, wrong tendencies and impulses of the being, and the acute sense of
this wrongness is the root of the human consciousness of sin. This deficiency of its nature it tries to set right by
standards of conduct which will help it to remove the egoistic consciousness and satisfactions of sin by the
egoistic consciousness and self-satisfaction of virtue, the rajasic by the sattwic egoism. But the original sin has to
be cured, the separation of its being and will from the divine Being and the divine Will; when it returns to unity
with the divine Will and Being, it rises beyond sin and virtue to the infinite self-existent purity and the security of
its own divine nature.
Page 680

Its incapacities it tries to set right by organising its imperfect knowledge and disciplining its half-enlightened will
and force and directing them by some systematic effort of the reason; but the result must always be a limited,
uncertain, mutable and stumbling way and standard of capacity in action. Only when it returns again to the large
unity of the free spirit, \s{bh\=um\=a}, can the action of its nature move perfectly as the instrument of the infinite
Spirit and in the steps of the Right and Truth and Power which belong to the free soul acting from the supreme
centre of its existence. Again, because it is limited in the delight of being, it is unable to lay hold on the secure,
self-existent perfect bliss of the spirit or the delight, the Ananda of the universe which keeps the world in motion,
but is only able to move in a mixed and shifting succession of pleasures and pains, joys and sorrows, or must take
refuge in some conscient inconscience or neutral indifference. The ego mind cannot do otherwise, and the soul
which has externalised itself in ego, is subjected to this unsatisfactory, secondary, imperfect, often perverse,
troubled or annulled enjoyment of existence; yet all the time the spiritual and universal Ananda is within, in the
self, in the spirit, in its secret unity with God and existence. To cast away the chain of ego and go back to free
self, immortal spiritual being is the soul's return to its own eternal divinity.
\par The will to the imperfect separative being, that wrong Tapas which makes the soul in Nature attempt to
individualise itself, to individualise its being, consciousness, force of being, delight of existence in a separative
sense, to have these things as its own, in its own right, and not in the right of God and of the universal oneness, is
that which brings about this wrong turn and creates the ego. To turn from this original desire is therefore
essential, to get back to the will without desire whose whole enjoyment of being and whole will in being is that of
a free universal and unifying Ananda. These two things are one, liberation from the will that is of the nature of
desire and liberation from the ego, and the oneness which is brought about by the happy loss of the will of desire
and the ego, is the essence of Mukti.
Page 681

\par
\hn Chapter IX
\par
\ht The Liberation of the Nature
\par\drop The two sides of our being, conscious experiencing soul and executive Nature continuously and
variously offering to the soul her experiences, determine in their meeting all the affections of our inner status and
its responses. Nature contributes the character of the happenings and the forms of the instruments of experience,
the soul meets it by an assent to the natural determinations of the response to these happenings or by a will to
other determination which it imposes upon the nature. The acceptance of the instrumental ego consciousness and
the will to desire are the initial consent of the self to the lapse into the lower ranges of experience in which it
forgets its divine nature of being; the rejection of these things, the return to free self and the will of the divine
delight in being is the liberation of the spirit. But on the other side stand the contributions of Nature herself to the
mixed tangle, which she imposes on the soul's experience of her doings and makings when once that first initial
consent has been given and made the law of the whole outward transaction. Nature's essential contributions are
two, the gunas and the dualities. This inferior action of Nature in which we live has certain essential qualitative
modes which constitute the whole basis of its inferiority. The constant effect of these modes on the soul in its
natural powers of mind, life and body is a discordant and divided experience, a strife of opposites, \s{dvandva}, a
motion in all its experience and an oscillation between or a mixture of constant pairs of contraries, of combining
positives and negatives, dualities. A complete liberation from the ego and the will of desire must bring with it a
superiority to the qualitative modes of the inferior Nature, \s{traigu\,ny\=at\=itya}, a release from this mixed and
discordant experience, a cessation or solution of the dual action of Nature. But on this side too there are two
kinds of freedom. A liberation from Nature in a quiescent bliss
Page 682

of the spirit is the first form of release. A farther liberation of the Nature into a divine quality and spiritual power
of world-experience fills the supreme calm with the supreme kinetic bliss of knowledge, power, joy and mastery.
A divine unity of supreme spirit and its supreme nature is the integral liberation.
\par Nature, because she is a power of spirit, is essentially qualitative in her action. One may almost say that
Nature is only the power in being and the development in action of the infinite qualities of the spirit,
\s{anantagu\,na}. All else belongs to her outward and more mechanical aspects; but this play of quality is the
essential thing, of which the rest is the result and mechanical combination. Once we have set right the working of
the essential power and quality, all the rest becomes subject to the control of the experiencing Purusha. But in
the inferior nature of things the play of infinite quality is subject to a limited measure, a divided and conflicting
working, a system of opposites and discords between which some practical mobile system of concords has to be
found and to be kept in action; this play of concorded discords, conflicting qualities, disparate powers and ways
of experience compelled to some just manageable, partial, mostly precarious agreement, an unstable mutable
equilibrium, is managed by a fundamental working in three qualitative modes which conflict and combine together
in all her creations. These three modes have been given in the Sankhya system, which is generally adopted for
this purpose by all the schools of philosophic thought and of Yoga in India, the three names, \s{sattva}, \s{rajas}
and \s{tamas}.
\note{This subject has been treated in the Yoga of Works. It is restated here from the point of view of the
general type of nature and the complete liberation of the being.} Tamas is the principle and power of inertia;
rajas is the principle of kinesis, passion, endeavour, struggle, initiation (\s{\=arambha}); sattwa the principle of
assimilation, equilibrium and harmony. The metaphysical bearing of this classification does not concern us; but in
its psychological and spiritual bearing it is of immense practical importance, because these three principles enter
into all things, combine to give them their turn of active nature, result, effectuation, and their unequal working in
the
Page 683

soul-experience is the constituent force of our active personality, our temperament, type of nature and cast of
psychological response to experience. All character of action and experience in us is determined by the
predominance and by the proportional interaction of these three qualities or modes of Nature. The soul in its
personality is obliged, as it were, to run into their moulds; mostly, too, it is controlled by them rather than has any
free control of them. The soul can only be free by rising above and rejecting the tormented strife of their unequal
action and their insufficient concords and combinations and precarious harmonies, whether in the sense of a
complete quiescence from the half-regulated chaos of their action or in the sense of a superiority to this lower
turn of nature and a higher control or transformation of their working. There must be either an emptiness of the
gunas or a superiority to the gunas.
\par The gunas affect every part of our natural being. They have indeed their strongest relative hold in the three
different members of it, mind, life and body. Tamas, the principle of inertia, is strongest in material nature and in
our physical being. The action of this principle is of two kinds, inertia of force and inertia of knowledge.
Whatever is predominantly governed by Tamas, tends in its force to a sluggish inaction and immobility or else to
a mechanical action which it does not possess, but is possessed by obscure forces which drive it in a mechanical
round of energy; equally in its consciousness it turns to an inconscience or enveloped subconscience or to a
reluctant, sluggish or in some way mechanical conscious action which does not possess the idea of its own
energy, but is guided by an idea which seems external to it or at least concealed from its active awareness. Thus
the principle of our body is in its nature inert, subconscient, incapable of anything but a mechanical and habitual
self-guidance and action: though it has like everything else a principle of \NH kinesis and a principle of
equilibrium of its state and action, an inherent principle of response and a secret consciousness, the greatest
portion of its rajasic motions are contributed by the life-power and all the overt consciousness by the mental
being. The principle of rajas has its strongest hold on the vital nature. It is
Page 684

the Life within us that is the strongest kinetic motor power, but the life-power in earthly beings is possessed by
the force of desire, therefore rajas turns always to action and desire; desire is the strongest human and animal
initiator of most kinesis and action, predominant to such an extent that many consider it the father of all action
and even the originator of our being. Moreover, rajas finding itself in a world of matter which starts from the
principle of inconscience and a mechanical driven inertia, has to work against an immense contrary force;
therefore its whole action takes on the nature of an effort, a struggle, a besieged and an impeded conflict for
possession which is distressed in its every step by a limiting incapacity, disappointment and suffering: even its
gains are precarious and limited and marred by the reaction of the effort and an aftertaste of insufficiency and
transience. The principle of sattwa has its strongest hold in the mind; not so much in the lower parts of the mind
which are dominated by the rajasic life-power, but mostly in the intelligence and the will of the reason.
Intelligence, reason, rational will are moved by the nature of their predominant principle towards a constant effort
of assimilation, assimilation by knowledge, assimilation by a power of understanding will, a constant effort
towards equilibrium, some stability, rule, harmony of the conflicting \NH elements of natural happening and
experience. This satisfaction it gets in various ways and in various degrees of acquisition. The attainment of
assimilation, equilibrium and harmony brings with it always a relative but more or less intense and satisfying
sense of ease, happiness, mastery, security, which is other than the troubled and vehement pleasures insecurely
bestowed by the satisfaction of rajasic desire and passion. Light and happiness are the characteristics of the
sattwic guna. The whole nature of the embodied living mental being is determined by these three gunas.
\par But these are only predominant powers in each part of our complex system. The three qualities mingle,
combine and strive in every fibre and in every member of our intricate psychology. The mental character is made
by them, the character of our reason, the character of our will, the character of our moral,
Page 685

aesthetic, emotional, dynamic, sensational being. Tamas brings in all the ignorance, inertia, weakness, incapacity
which afflicts our nature, a clouded reason, nescience, unintelligence, a clinging to habitual notions and
mechanical ideas, the refusal to think and know, the small mind, the closed avenues, the trotting round of mental
habit, the dark and the twilit places. Tamas brings in the impotent will, want of faith and self-confidence and
initiative, the disinclination to act, the shrinking from endeavour and aspiration, the poor and little spirit, and in our
moral and dynamic being the inertia, the cowardice, baseness, sloth, lax subjection to small and ignoble motives,
the weak yielding to our lower nature. Tamas brings into our emotional nature insensibility, indifference, want of
sympathy and openness, the shut soul, the callous heart, the soon spent affection and languor of the feelings, into
our aesthetic and sensational nature the dull aesthesis, the limited range of response, the insensibility to beauty, all
that makes in man the coarse, heavy and vulgar spirit. Rajas contributes our normal active nature with all its good
and evil; when unchastened by a sufficient element of sattwa, it turns to egoism, self-will and violence, the
perverse, obstinate or exaggerating action of the reason, prejudice, attachment to opinion, clinging to error, the
subservience of the intelligence to our desires and preferences and not to the truth, the fanatic or the sectarian
mind, self-will, pride, arrogance, selfishness, ambition, lust, greed, cruelty, hatred, jealousy, the egoisms of love, all
the vices and passions, the exaggerations of the aesthesis, the morbidities and perversions of the sensational and
vital being. Tamas in its own right produces the coarse, dull and ignorant type of human nature, rajas the vivid,
restless, kinetic man, driven by the breath of action, passion and desire. Sattwa produces a higher type. The gifts
of sattwa are the mind of reason and balance, clarity of the disinterested truth-seeking open intelligence, a will
subordinated to the reason or guided by the ethical spirit, self-control, equality, calm, love, sympathy, refinement,
measure, fineness of the aesthetic and emotional mind, in the sensational being delicacy, just acceptivity,
moderation and poise, a vitality subdued and governed by the mastering intelligence. The
Page 686

\NH accomplished types of the sattwic man are the philosopher, saint and sage, of the rajasic man the statesman,
warrior, forceful man of action. But in all men there is in greater or less proportions a mingling of the gunas, a
multiple personality and in most a good deal of shifting and alternation from the predominance of one to the
prevalence of another guna; even in the governing form of their nature most human beings are of a mixed type.
All the colour and variety of life is made of the intricate pattern of the weaving of the gunas.
\par But richness of life, even a sattwic harmony of mind and nature does not constitute spiritual perfection.
There is a relative possible perfection, but it is a perfection of incompleteness, some partial height, force, beauty,
some measure of nobility and greatness, some imposed and precariously sustained balance. There is a relative
mastery, but it is a mastery of the body by life or of the life by mind, not a free possession of the instruments by
the liberated and self-possessing spirit. The gunas have to be transcended if we would arrive at spiritual
perfection. Tamas evidently has to be overcome, inertia and ignorance and incapacity cannot be elements of a
true perfection; but it can only be overcome in Nature by the force of rajas aided by an increasing force of
sattwa. Rajas has to be overcome, egoism, personal desire and self-seeking passion are not elements of the true
perfection; but it can only be overcome by force of sattwa enlightening the being and force of tamas limiting the
action. Sattwa itself does not give the highest or the integral perfection; sattwa is always a quality of the limited
nature; sattwic knowledge is the light of a limited mentality; sattwic will is the government of a limited intelligent
force. Moreover, sattwa cannot act by itself in Nature, but has to rely for all action on the aid of rajas, so that
even sattwic action is always liable to the imperfections of rajas; egoism, perplexity, inconsistency, a one-sided
turn, a limited and exaggerated will, exaggerating itself in the intensity of its limitations, pursue the mind and
action even of the saint, philosopher and sage. There is a sattwic as well as a rajasic or tamasic egoism, at the
highest an egoism of knowledge or virtue; but the mind's egoism of whatever type is incompatible with
Page 687

liberation. All the three gunas have to be transcended. Sattwa may bring us near to the Light, but its limited
clarity falls away from us when we enter into the luminous body of the divine Nature.
\par This transcendence is usually sought by a withdrawal from the action of the lower nature. That withdrawal
brings with it a stressing of the tendency to inaction. Sattwa when it wishes to intensify itself, seeks to get rid of
rajas and calls in the aid of the tamasic principle of inaction; that is the reason why a certain type of highly
sattwic men live intensely in the inward being, but hardly at all in the outward life of action, or else are there
incompetent and ineffective. The seeker of liberation goes farther in this direction, strives by imposing an
enlightened tamas on his natural being, a tamas which by this saving enlightenment is more of a quiescence than
an incapacity, to give the sattwic guna freedom to lose itself in the light of the spirit. A quietude and stillness is
imposed on the body, on the active life-soul of desire and ego, on the external mind, while the sattwic nature by
stress of meditation, by an exclusive concentration of adoration, by a will turned inward to the Supreme, strives to
merge itself in the spirit. But if this is sufficient for a quietistic release, it is not sufficient for the freedom of an
integral perfection. This liberation depends upon inaction and is not entirely self-existent and absolute; the
moment the soul turns to action, it finds that the activity of the nature is still the old imperfect motion. There is a
liberation of the soul from the nature which is gained by inaction, but not a liberation of the soul in nature perfect
and self-existent whether in action or in inaction. The question then arises whether such a liberation and
perfection are possible and what may be the condition of this perfect freedom.
\par The ordinary idea is that it is not possible because all action is of the lower gunas, necessarily defective,
\s{sado\,sam}, caused by the motion, inequality, want of balance, unstable strife of the gunas; but when these
unequal gunas fall into perfect equilibrium, all action of Nature ceases and the soul rests in its quietude. The
divine Being, we may say, may either exist in his silence or act in Nature through her instrumentation, but in that
case must
Page 688

put on the appearance of her strife and imperfection. That may be true of the ordinary deputed action of the
Divine in the human spirit with its present relations of soul to nature in an embodied imperfect mental being, but it
is not true of the divine nature of perfection. The strife of the gunas is only a representation in the imperfection
of the lower nature; what the three gunas stand for are three essential powers of the Divine which are not
merely existent in a perfect equilibrium of quietude, but unified in a perfect consensus of divine action. Tamas in
the spiritual being becomes a divine calm, which is not an inertia and incapacity of action, but a perfect power,
\s{\'sakti}, holding in itself all its capacity and capable of controlling and subjecting to the law of calm even the
most stupendous and enormous activity: rajas becomes a self-effecting initiating sheer Will of the spirit, which is
not desire, endeavour, striving passion, but the same perfect power of being, \s{\'sakti}, capable of an infinite,
imperturbable and blissful action. Sattwa becomes not the modified mental light, \s{prak\=a\'sa}, but the self-existent
light of the divine being, \s{jyoti\,h}, which is the soul of the perfect power of being and illumines in their unity the
divine quietude and the divine will of action. The ordinary liberation gets the still divine light in the divine quietude,
but the integral perfection will aim at this greater triune unity.
\par When this liberation of the nature comes, there is a liberation also of all the spiritual sense of the dualities of
Nature. In the lower nature the dualities are the inevitable effect of the play of the gunas on the soul affected by
the formations of the sattwic, rajasic and tamasic ego. The knot of this duality is an ignorance which is unable to
seize on the spiritual truth of things and concentrates on the imperfect appearances, but meets them not with a
mastery of their inner truth, but with a strife and a shifting balance of attraction and repulsion, capacity and
incapacity, liking and disliking, pleasure and pain, joy and sorrow, acceptance and repugnance; all life is
represented to us as a tangle of these things, of the pleasant and the unpleasant, the beautiful and the unbeautiful,
truth and falsehood, fortune and misfortune, success and failure, good and evil, the inextricable double web of
Nature. Attachment to its likings and repugnances
Page 689

keeps the soul bound in this web of good and evil, joys and sorrows. The seeker of liberation gets rid of
attachment, throws away from his soul the dualities, but as the dualities appear to be the whole act, stuff and
frame of life, this release would seem to be most easily compassed by a withdrawal from life, whether a physical
withdrawal, so far as that is possible while in the body, or an inner retirement, a refusal of sanction, a liberating
distaste, \s{vair\=agya}, for the whole action of Nature. There is a separation of the soul from Nature. Then the
soul watches seated above and unmoved, \s{ud\=as\=ina}, the strife of the gunas in the natural being and regards as
an impassive witness the pleasure and pain of the mind and body. Or it is able to impose its indifference even on
the outer mind and watches with the impartial calm or the impartial joy of the detached spectator the universal
action in which it has no longer an active inner participation. The end of this movement is the rejection of birth
and a departure into the silent self, \s{mok\,sa}.
\par But this rejection is not the last possible word of liberation. The integral liberation comes when this passion
for release, \s{mumuk\,sutva}, founded on distaste or \s{vair\=agya}, is itself transcended; the soul is then liberated
both from attachment to the lower action of nature and from all repugnance to the cosmic action of the Divine.
This liberation gets its completeness when the spiritual gnosis can act with a supramental knowledge and
reception of the action of Nature and a supramental luminous will in initiation. The gnosis discovers the spiritual
sense in Nature, God in things, the soul of good in all things that have the contrary appearance; that soul is
delivered in them and out of them, the perversions of the imperfect or contrary forms fall away or are
transformed into their higher divine truth,—even as the gunas go back to their divine principles,—and the spirit
lives in a universal, infinite and absolute Truth, Good, Beauty, Bliss which is the supramental or ideal divine
Nature. The liberation of the Nature becomes one with the liberation of the spirit, and there is founded in the
integral freedom the integral perfection.
Page 690

\par
\hn Chapter X
\par
\ht The Elements of Perfection
\par\drop When the self is purified of the wrong and confused action of the instrumental Nature and liberated into
its self-existent being, consciousness, power and bliss and the Nature itself liberated from the tangle of this lower
action of the struggling gunas and the dualities into the high truth of the divine calm and the divine action, then
spiritual perfection becomes possible. Purification and freedom are the indispensable antecedents of perfection.
A spiritual self-perfection can only mean a growing into oneness with the nature of divine being, and therefore
according to our conception of divine being will be the aim, effort and method of our seeking after this perfection.
To the Mayavadin the highest or rather the only real truth of being is the impassive, impersonal, self-aware
Absolute and therefore to grow into an impassive calm, impersonality and pure self-awareness of spirit is his idea
of perfection and a rejection of cosmic and individual being and a settling into silent self-knowledge is his way.
To the Buddhist for whom the highest truth is a negation of being, a recognition of the impermanence and sorrow
of being and the disastrous nullity of desire and a dissolution of egoism, of the upholding associations of the Idea
and the successions of Karma are the perfect way. Other ideas of the Highest are less negative; each according
to its own idea leads towards some likeness to the Divine, \s{s\=ad\,r\'sya}, and each finds its own way, such as the
love and worship of the Bhakta and the growing into the likeness of the Divine by love. But for the integral Yoga
perfection will mean a divine spirit and a divine nature which will admit of a divine relation and action in the
world; it will mean also in its entirety a divinising of the whole nature, a rejection of all its wrong knots of being
and action, but no rejection of any part of our being or of any field of our action. The approach to perfection must
be therefore a
Page 691

large and complex movement and its results and workings will have an infinite and varied scope. We must fix in
order to find a clue and method on certain essential and fundamental elements and requisites of perfection,
\s{siddhi}; for if these are secured, all the rest will be found to be only their natural development or particular
working. We may cast these elements into six divisions, interdependent on each other to a great extent but still in
a certain way naturally successive in their order of attainment. The movement will start from a basic equality of
the soul and mount to an ideal action of the Divine through our perfected being in the largeness of the Brahmic
unity.
\par The first necessity is some fundamental poise of the soul both in its essential and its natural being regarding
and meeting the things, impacts and workings of Nature. This poise we shall arrive at by growing into a perfect
equality, \s{samat\=a}. The self, spirit or Brahman is one in all and therefore one to all; it is, as is said in the Gita
which has developed fully this idea of equality and indicated its experience on at least one side of equality, the
equal Brahman, \sforced{sama\.m brahma}; the Gita even goes so far in one passage as to identify equality and
yoga, \s{samatva\.m yoga ucyate}. That is to say, equality is the sign of unity with the Brahman, of becoming
Brahman, of growing into an undisturbed spiritual poise of being in the Infinite. Its importance can hardly be \NH
exaggerated; for it is the sign of our having passed beyond the egoistic determinations of our nature, of our
having conquered our enslaved response to the dualities, of our having transcended the shifting turmoil of the
gunas, of our having entered into the calm and peace of liberation. Equality is a term of consciousness which
brings into the whole of our being and nature the eternal tranquillity of the Infinite. Moreover, it is the condition of
a securely and perfectly divine action; the security and largeness of the cosmic action of the Infinite is based
upon and never breaks down or forfeits its eternal tranquillity. That too must be the character of the perfect
spiritual action; to be equal and one to all things in spirit, understanding, mind, heart and natural
consciousness,—even in the most physical consciousness,—and to make all their workings, whatever their
outward adaptation to
Page 692

the thing to be done, always and imminuably full of the divine equality and calm must be its inmost principle. That
may be said to be the passive or basic, the fundamental and receptive side of equality, but there is also an active
and possessive side, an equal bliss which can only come when the peace of equality is founded and which is the
beatific flower of its fullness.
\par The next necessity of perfection is to raise all the active parts of the human nature to that highest condition
and working pitch of their power and capacity, \s{\'sakti}, at which they become capable of being divinised into
true instruments of the free, perfect, spiritual and divine action. For practical purposes we may take the
understanding, the heart, the prana and the body as the four members of our nature which have thus to be
prepared, and we have to find the constituent terms of their perfection. Also there is the dynamical force in us
(\s{v\=irya}) of the temperament, character and soul nature, \s{svabh\=ava}, which makes the power of our
members effective in action and gives them their type and direction; this has to be freed from its limitations,
enlarged, rounded so that the whole manhood in us may become the basis of a divine manhood, when the
Purusha, the real Man in us, the divine Soul, shall act fully in this human instrument and shine fully through this
human vessel. To divinise the perfected nature we have to call in the divine Power or Shakti to replace our
limited human energy so that this may be shaped into the image of and filled with the force of a greater infinite
energy, \s{daiv\=i prak\,rti}, \s{bh\=agavat\=i \'sakti}. This perfection will grow in the measure in which we can surrender
ourselves, first, to the guidance and then to the direct action of that Power and of the Master of our being and
our works to whom it belongs, and for this purpose faith is the essential, faith is the great motor-power of our
being in our aspirations to perfection,—here, a faith in God and the Shakti which shall begin in the heart and
understanding, but shall take possession of all our nature, all its consciousness, all its dynamic motive-force.
These four things are the essentials of this second element of perfection, the full powers of the members of the
instrumental nature, the perfected dynamis of the soul nature, the assumption of them into the action of the divine
Page 693

Power, and a perfect faith in all our members to call and support that assumption, \s{\'sakti}, \s{v\=irya}, \s{daiv\=i
prak\,rti}, \s{\'sraddh\=a}.
\par But so long as this development takes place only on the highest level of our normal nature, we may have a
reflected and limited image of perfection translated into the lower terms of the soul in mind, life and body, but not
the possession of the divine perfection in the highest terms possible to us of the divine Idea and its Power. That is
to be found beyond these lower principles in the supramental gnosis; therefore the next step of perfection will be
the evolution of the mental into the gnostic being. This evolution is effected by a breaking beyond the mental
limitation, a stride upward into the next higher plane or region of our being hidden from us at present by the
shining lid of the mental reflections and a conversion of all that we are into the terms of this greater
consciousness. In the gnosis itself, \s{vij\~n\=ana}, there are several gradations which open at their highest into the
full and infinite Ananda. The gnosis once effectively called into action will progressively take up all the terms of
intelligence, will, sense-mind, heart, the vital and sensational being and translate them by a luminous and
harmonising conversion into a unity of the truth, power and delight of a divine existence. It will lift into that light
and force and convert into their own highest sense our whole intellectual, volitional, dynamic, ethical, aesthetic,
sensational, vital and physical being. It has the power also of overcoming physical limitations and developing a
more perfect and divinely instrumental body. Its light opens up the fields of the superconscient and darts its rays
and pours its luminous flood into the subconscient and enlightens its obscure hints and withheld secrets. It admits
us to a greater light of the Infinite than is reflected in the paler luminosity even of the highest mentality. While it
perfects the individual soul and nature in the sense of a diviner existence and makes a full harmony of the
diversities of our being, it founds all its action upon the Unity from which it proceeds and takes up everything into
that Unity. Personality and impersonality, the two eternal aspects of existence, are made one by its action in the
spiritual being and Nature body of the Purushottama.
Page 694

\par The gnostic perfection, spiritual in its nature, is to be accomplished here in the body and takes life in the
physical world as one of its fields, even though the gnosis opens to us possession of planes and worlds beyond
the material universe. The physical body is therefore a basis of action, \s{prati\,s\,th\=a}, which cannot be despised,
neglected or excluded from the spiritual evolution: a perfection of the body as the outer instrument of a complete
divine living on earth will be necessarily a part of the gnostic conversion. The change will be effected by bringing
in the law of the gnostic Purusha, \s{vij\~n\=anamaya puru\,sa}, and of that into which it opens, the Anandamaya, into
the physical consciousness and its members. Pushed to its highest conclusion this movement brings in a
spiritualising and illumination of the whole physical consciousness and a divinising of the law of the body. For
behind the gross physical sheath of this materially visible and sensible frame there is subliminally supporting it and
discoverable by a finer subtle consciousness a subtle body of the mental being and a spiritual or causal body of
the gnostic and bliss soul in which all the perfection of a spiritual embodiment is to be found, a yet unmanifested
divine law of the body. Most of the physical siddhis acquired by certain Yogins are brought about by some
opening up of the law of the subtle or a calling down of something of the law of the spiritual body. The ordinary
method is the opening up of the \sforced{cakras} by the physical processes of Hathayoga (of which something is
also included in the Rajayoga) or by the methods of the Tantric discipline. But while these may be optionally used
at certain stages by the integral Yoga, they are not indispensable; for here the reliance is on the power of the
higher being to change the lower existence, a working is chosen mainly from above downward and not the
opposite way, and therefore the development of the superior power of the gnosis will be awaited as the
instrumentative change in this part of the Yoga.
\par There will remain, because it will then only be entirely possible, the perfect action and enjoyment of being on
the gnostic basis. The Purusha enters into cosmic manifestation for the variations of his infinite existence, for
knowledge, action and
Page 695

enjoyment; the gnosis brings the fullness of spiritual knowledge and it will found on that the divine action and cast
the enjoyment of world and being into the law of the truth, the freedom and the perfection of the spirit. But
neither action nor enjoyment will be the lower action of the gunas and consequent egoistic enjoyment mostly of
the satisfaction of rajasic desire which is our present way of living. Whatever desire will remain, if that name be
given, will be the divine desire, the will to delight of the Purusha enjoying in his freedom and perfection the action
of the perfected Prakriti and all her members. The Prakriti will take up the whole nature into the law of her
higher divine truth and act in that law offering up the universal enjoyment of her action and being to the
Anandamaya Ishwara, the Lord of existence and works and Spirit of bliss, who presides over and governs her
workings. The individual soul will be the channel of this action and offering, and it will enjoy at once its oneness
with the Ishwara and its oneness with the Prakriti and will enjoy all relations with Infinite and finite, with God and
the universe and beings in the universe in the highest terms of the union of the universal Purusha and Prakriti.
\par All the gnostic evolution opens up into the divine principle of Ananda, which is the foundation of the fullness
of spiritual being, consciousness and bliss of Sachchidananda or eternal Brahman. Possessed at first by reflection
in the mental experience, it will be possessed afterwards with a greater fullness and directness in the massed and
luminous consciousness, \s{cidghana}, which comes by the gnosis. The Siddha or perfected soul will live in union
with the Purushottama in this Brahmic consciousness, he will be conscious in the Brahman that is the All,
\s{sarva\.m brahma}, in the Brahman infinite in being and infinite in quality, \s{ananta\.m brahma}, in Brahman as
self-existent consciousness and universal knowledge, \s{j\~n\=ana\.m brahma}, in Brahman as the self-existent bliss
and its universal delight of being, \s{\=ananda\.m brahma}. He will experience all the universe as the manifestation
of the One, all quality and action as the play of his universal and infinite energy, all knowledge and conscious
experience as the outflowing of that consciousness, and all in the terms of that
Page 696

one Ananda. His physical being will be one with all material Nature, his vital being with the life of the universe,
his mind with the cosmic mind, his spiritual knowledge and will with the divine knowledge and will both in itself
and as it pours itself through these channels, his spirit with the one spirit in all beings. All the variety of cosmic
existence will be changed to him in that unity and revealed in the secret of its spiritual significance. For in this
spiritual bliss and being he will be one with That which is the origin and continent and inhabitant and spirit and
constituting power of all existence. This will be the highest reach of self-perfection.
Page 697

\par
\hn Chapter XI
\par
\ht The Perfection of Equality
\par\drop The very first necessity for spiritual perfection is a perfect equality. Perfection in the sense in which
we use it in Yoga, means a growth out of a lower undivine into a higher divine nature. In terms of knowledge it is
a putting on the being of the higher self and a casting away of the darker broken lower self or a transforming of
our imperfect state into the rounded luminous fullness of our real and spiritual personality. In terms of devotion
and adoration it is a growing into a likeness of the nature or the law of the being of the Divine, to be united with
whom we aspire,—for if there is not this likeness, this oneness of the law of the being, unity between that
transcending and universal and this individual spirit is not possible. The supreme divine nature is founded on
equality. This affirmation is true of it whether we look on the Supreme Being as a pure silent Self and Spirit or as
the divine Master of cosmic existence. The pure Self is equal, unmoved, the witness in an impartial peace of all
the happenings and relations of cosmic existence. While it is not averse to them,—aversion is not equality, nor, if
that were the attitude of the Self to cosmic existence, could the universe come at all into being or proceed upon
its cycles,—a detachment, the calm of an equal regard, a superiority to the reactions which trouble and are the
disabling weakness of the soul involved in outward nature, are the very substance of the silent Infinite's purity
and the condition of its impartial assent and support to the many-sided movement of the universe. But in that
power too of the Supreme which governs and develops these motions, the same equality is a basic condition.
\par The Master of things cannot be affected or troubled by the reactions of things; if he were, he would be
subject to them, not master, not free to develop them according to his sovereign will and wisdom and according
to the inner truth and necessity of
Page 698

what is behind their relations, but obliged rather to act according to the claim of temporary accident and
phenomenon. The truth of all things is in the calm of their depths, not in the shifting inconstant wave form on the
surface. The supreme conscious Being in his divine knowledge and will and love governs their evolution—to our
ignorance so often a cruel confusion and distraction—from these depths and is not troubled by the clamour of the
surface. The divine nature does not share in our gropings and our passions; when we speak of the divine wrath
or favour or of God suffering in man, we are using a human language which mistranslates the inner significance
of the movement we characterise. We see something of the real truth of them when we rise out of the
phenomenal mind into the heights of the spiritual being. For then we perceive that whether in the silence of self
or in its action in the cosmos, the Divine is always Sachchidananda, an infinite existence, an infinite
consciousness and self-founded power of conscious being, an infinite bliss in all his existence. We ourselves
begin to dwell in an equal light, strength, joy—the psychological rendering of the divine knowledge, will and
delight in self and things which are the active universal outpourings from those infinite sources. In the strength of
that light, power and joy a secret self and spirit within us accepts and transforms always into food of its perfect
experience the dual letters of the mind's transcript of life, and if there were not the hidden greater existence even
now within us, we could not bear the pressure of the universal force or subsist in this great and dangerous world.
A perfect equality of our spirit and nature is a means by which we can move back from the troubled and ignorant
outer consciousness into this inner kingdom of heaven and possess the spirit's eternal kingdoms, \s{r\=ajya\.m
sam\,rddham}, of greatness, joy and peace. That self-elevation to the divine nature is the complete fruit and the
whole occasion of the discipline of equality demanded from us by the self-perfecting aim in Yoga.
\par A perfect equality and peace of the soul is indispensable to change the whole substance of our being into
substance of the self out of its present stuff of troubled mentality. It is equally indispensable if we aspire to
replace our present confused and
Page 699

ignorant action by the self-possessed and luminous works of a free spirit governing its nature and in tune with
universal being. A divine action or even a perfect human action is impossible if we have not equality of spirit and
an equality in the motive-forces of our nature. The Divine is equal to all, an impartial sustainer of his universe,
who views all with equal eyes, assents to the law of developing being which he has brought out of the depths of
his existence, tolerates what has to be tolerated, depresses what has to be depressed, raises what has to be
raised, creates, sustains and destroys with a perfect and equal understanding of all causes and results and
working out of the spiritual and pragmatic meaning of all phenomena. God does not create in obedience to any
troubled passion of desire or maintain and preserve through an attachment of partial preference or destroy in a
fury of wrath, disgust or aversion. The Divine deals with great and small, just and unjust, ignorant and wise as the
Self of all who, deeply intimate and one with the being, leads all according to their nature and need with a perfect
understanding, power and justness of proportion. But through it all he moves things according to his large aim in
the cycles and draws the soul upward in the evolution through its apparent progress and retrogression towards
the higher and ever higher development which is the sense of the cosmic urge. The self-perfecting individual who
seeks to be one in will with the Divine and make his nature an instrument of the divine purpose, must enlarge
himself out of the egoistic and partial views and motives of the human ignorance and mould himself into an image
of this supreme equality.
\par This equal poise in action is especially necessary for the sadhaka of the integral Yoga. First, he must acquire
that equal assent and understanding which will respond to the law of the divine action without trying to impose on
it a partial will and the violent claim of a personal aspiration. A wise impersonality, a quiescent equality, a
universality which sees all things as the manifestations of the Divine, the one Existence, is not angry, troubled,
impatient with the way of things or on the other hand excited, over-eager and precipitate, but sees that the law
must be
Page 700

obeyed and the pace of time respected, observes and understands with sympathy the actuality of things and
beings, but looks also behind the present appearance to their inner significances and forward to the unrolling of
their divine possibilities, is the first thing demanded of those who would do works as the perfect instruments of
the Divine. But this impersonal acquiescence is only the basis. Man is the instrument of an evolution which
wears at first the mask of a struggle, but grows more and more into its truer and deeper sense of a constant wise
adjustment and must take on in a rising scale the deepest truth and significance—now only underlying the
adjustment and struggle—of a universal harmony. The perfected human soul must always be an instrument for
the hastening of the ways of this evolution. For that a divine power acting with the royalty of the divine will in it
must be in whatever degree present in the nature. But to be accomplished and permanent, steadfast in action,
truly divine, it has to proceed on the basis of a spiritual equality, a calm, impersonal and equal self-identification
with all beings, an understanding of all energies. The Divine acts with a mighty power in the myriad workings of
the universe, but with the supporting light and force of an imperturbable oneness, freedom and peace. That must
be the type of the perfected soul's divine works. And equality is the condition of the being which makes possible
this changed spirit in the action.
\par But even a human perfection cannot dispense with equality as one of its chief elements and even its
essential atmosphere. The aim of a human perfection must include, if it is to \NH deserve the name, two things,
self-mastery and a mastery of the surroundings; it must seek for them in the greatest degree of these powers
which is at all attainable by our human nature. Man's urge of self-perfection is to be, in the ancient language,
\s{svar\=a\,t} and \s{samr\=a\,t}, self-ruler and king. But to be self-ruler is not possible for him if he is subject to the
attack of the lower nature, to the turbulence of grief and joy, to the violent touches of pleasure and pain, to the
tumult of his emotions and passions, to the bondage of his personal likings and dislikings, to the strong chains of
desire and attachment, to the narrowness of a personal
Page 701

and emotionally preferential judgment and opinion, to all the hundred touches of his egoism and its pursuing stamp
on his thought, feeling and action. All these things are the slavery to the lower self which the greater “I” in man
must put under his feet if he is to be king of his own nature. To surmount them is the condition of self-rule; but of
that surmounting again equality is the condition and the essence of the movement. To be quite free from all these
things,—if possible, or at least to be master of and superior to them,—is equality. Farther, one who is not
self-ruler, cannot be master of his surroundings. The knowledge, the will, the harmony which is necessary for this
outward mastery, can come only as a crown of the inward conquest. It belongs to the self-possessing soul and
mind which follows with a disinterested equality the Truth, the Right, the universal Largeness to which alone this
mastery is possible,—following always the great ideal they present to our imperfection while it understands and
makes a full allowance too for all that seems to conflict with them and stand in the way of their manifestation.
This rule is true even on the levels of our actual human mentality, where we can only get a limited perfection.
But the ideal of Yoga takes up this aim of Swarajya and Samrajya and puts it on the larger spiritual basis. There
it gets its full power, opens to the diviner degrees of the spirit; for it is by oneness with the Infinite, by a spiritual
power acting upon finite things, that some highest integral perfection of our being and nature finds its own native
foundation.
\par A perfect equality not only of the self, but in the nature is a condition of the Yoga of self-perfection. The
first obvious step to it will be the conquest of our emotional and vital being, for here are the sources of greatest
trouble, the most rampant forces of inequality and subjection, the most insistent claim of our imperfection. The
equality of these parts of our nature comes by purification and freedom. We might say that equality is the very
sign of liberation. To be free from the domination of the urge of vital desire and the stormy mastery of the soul
by the passions is to have a calm and equal heart and a life-principle governed by the large and even view of a
universal spirit. Desire is the impurity of the Prana, the life-principle, and its chain
Page 702

of bondage. A free Prana means a content and satisfied life-soul which fronts the contact of outward things
without desire and receives them with an equal response; delivered, uplifted above the servile duality of liking and
disliking, indifferent to the urgings of pleasure and pain, not excited by the pleasant, not troubled and
overpowered by the unpleasant, not clinging with attachment to the touches it prefers or violently repelling those
for which it has an aversion, it will be opened to a greater system of values of experience. All that comes to it
from the world with menace or with solicitation, it will refer to the higher principles, to a reason and heart in
touch with or changed by the light and calm joy of the spirit. Thus quieted, mastered by the spirit and no longer
trying to impose its own mastery on the deeper and finer soul in us, this life-soul will be itself spiritualised and
work as a clear and noble instrument of the diviner dealings of the spirit with things. There is no question here of
an ascetic killing of the life-impulse and its native utilities and functions; not its killing is demanded, but its
transformation. The function of the Prana is enjoyment, but the real enjoyment of existence is an inward spiritual
Ananda, not partial and troubled like that of our vital, emotional or mental pleasure, degraded as they are now by
the predominance of the physical mind, but universal, profound, a massed concentration of spiritual bliss
possessed in a calm ecstasy of self and all existence. Possession is its function, by possession comes the soul's
enjoyment of things, but this is the real possession, a thing large and inward, not dependent on the outward seizing
which makes us subject to what we seize. All outward possession and enjoyment will be only an occasion of a
satisfied and equal play of the spiritual Ananda with the forms and phenomena of its own world-being. The
egoistic possession, the making things our own in the sense of the ego's claim on God and beings and the world,
\s{parigraha}, must be renounced in order that this greater thing, this large, universal and perfect life, may come.
\s{Tyaktena bhu\~nj\=ith\=a\,h}, by renouncing the egoistic sense of desire and possession, the soul enjoys divinely its
self and the universe.
\par A free heart is similarly a heart delivered from the gusts and
Page 703

storms of the affections and the passions; the assailing touch of grief, wrath, hatred, fear, inequality of love,
trouble of joy, pain of sorrow fall away from the equal heart, and leave it a thing large, calm, equal, luminous,
divine. These things are not incumbent on the essential nature of our being, but the creations of the present make
of our outward active mental and vital nature and its transactions with its surroundings. The ego-sense which
induces us to act as separate beings who make their isolated claim and experience the test of the values of the
universe, is responsible for these aberrations. When we live in unity with the Divine in ourselves and the spirit of
the universe, these imperfections fall away from us and disappear in the calm and equal strength and delight of
the inner spiritual existence. Always that is within us and transforms the outward touches before they reach it by
a passage through a subliminal psychic soul in us which is the hidden instrument of its delight of being. By
equality of the heart we get away from the troubled desire-soul on the surface, open the gates of this profounder
being, bring out its responses and impose their true divine values on all that solicits our emotional being. A free,
happy, equal and all-embracing heart of spiritual feeling is the outcome of this perfection.
\par In this perfection too there is no question of a severe ascetic insensibility, an aloof spiritual indifference or a
strained rugged austerity of self-suppression. This is not a killing of the emotional nature but a transformation. All
that presents itself here in our outward nature in perverse or imperfect forms has a significance and utility which
come out when we get back to the greater truth of divine being. Love will be not destroyed, but perfected,
enlarged to its widest capacity, deepened to its spiritual rapture, the love of God, the love of man, the love of all
things as ourselves and as beings and powers of the Divine; a large, universal love, not at all incapable of various
relation, will replace the clamant, egoistic, self-regarding love of little joys and griefs and insistent demands
afflicted with all the chequered pattern of angers and jealousies and satisfactions, rushings to unity and
movements of fatigue, divorce and separation on
Page 704

which we now place so high a value. Grief will cease to exist, but a universal, an equal love and sympathy will
take its place, not a suffering sympathy, but a power which, itself delivered, is strong to sustain, to help, to
liberate. To the free spirit wrath and hatred are impossible, but not the strong Rudra energy of the Divine which
can battle without hatred and destroy without wrath because all the time aware of the things it destroys as parts
of itself, its own manifestations and unaltered therefore in its sympathy and understanding of those in whom are
embodied these manifestations. All our emotional nature will undergo this high liberating transformation; but in
order that it may do so, a perfect equality is the effective condition.
\par The same equality must be brought into the rest of our being. Our whole dynamic being is acting under the
influence of unequal impulses, the manifestations of the lower ignorant nature. These urgings we obey or partially
control or place on them the changing and modifying influence of our reason, our refining aesthetic sense and
mind and regulating ethical notions. A tangled strain of right and wrong, of useful and harmful, harmonious or
disordered activity is the mixed result of our endeavour, a shifting standard of human reason and unreason, virtue
and vice, honour and dishonour, the noble and the ignoble, things approved and things disapproved of men, much
trouble of self-approbation and disapprobation or of self-righteousness and disgust, remorse, shame and moral
depression. These things are no doubt very necessary at present for our spiritual evolution. But the seeker of a
greater perfection will draw back from all these dualities, regard them with an equal eye and arrive through
equality at an impartial and universal action of the dynamic Tapas, spiritual force, in which his own force and will
are turned into pure and just instruments of a greater calm secret of divine working. The ordinary mental
standards will be exceeded on the basis of this dynamic equality. The eye of his will must look beyond to a purity
of divine being, a motive of divine will-power guided by divine knowledge of which his perfected nature will be
the engine, \s{yantra}. That must remain impossible in entirety as long as the dynamic ego with its subservience
to the emotional
Page 705

and vital impulses and the preferences of the personal judgment interferes in his action. A perfect equality of the
will is the power which dissolves these knots of the lower impulsion to works. This equality will not respond to
the lower impulses, but watch for a greater seeing impulsion from the Light above the mind, and will not judge
and govern with the intellectual judgment, but wait for enlightenment and direction from a superior plane of
vision. As it mounts upward to the supramental being and widens inward to the spiritual largeness, the dynamic
nature will be transformed, spiritualised like the emotional and pranic, and grow into a power of the divine nature.
There will be plenty of stumblings and errors and imperfections of adjustment of the instruments to their new
working, but the increasingly equal soul will not be troubled overmuch or grieve at these things, since, delivered to
the guidance of the Light and Power within self and above mind, it will proceed on its way with a firm assurance
and await with growing calm the vicissitudes and completion of the process of transformation. The promise of
the Divine Being in the Gita will be the anchor of its resolution, “Abandon all dharmas and take refuge in Me
alone; I will deliver thee from all sin and evil; do not grieve.”
\par The equality of the thinking mind will be a part and a very important part of the perfection of the instruments
in the nature. Our present attractive self-justifying attachment to our intellectual preferences, our judgments,
opinions, imaginations, limiting associations of the memory which makes the basis of our mentality, to the current
repetitions of our habitual mind, to the insistences of our pragmatic mind, to the limitations even of our intellectual
truth-mind, must go the way of other attachments and yield to the impartiality of an equal vision. The equal
thought-mind will look on knowledge and ignorance and on truth and error, those dualities created by our limited
nature of consciousness and the partiality of our intellect and its little stock of reasonings and intuitions, accept
them both without being bound to either twine of the skein and await a luminous transcendence. In ignorance it
will see a knowledge which is imprisoned and seeks or waits for delivery, in error a
Page 706

truth at work which has lost itself or got thrown by the groping mind into misleading forms. On the other side it
will not hold itself bound and limited by its knowledge or forbidden by it to proceed to fresh illumination, nor lay
too fierce a grasp on truth, even when using it to the full, or tyrannously chain it to its present formulations. This
perfect equality of the thinking mind is indispensable because the objective of this progress is the greater light
which belongs to a higher plane of spiritual cognizance. This equality is the most delicate and difficult of all, the
least practised by the human mind; its perfection is impossible so long as the supramental light does not fall fully
on the upward looking mentality. But an increasing will to equality in the intelligence is needed, before that light
can work freely upon the mental substance. This too is not an abnegation of the seekings and cosmic purposes of
the intelligence, not an indifference or impartial scepticism, nor yet a stilling of all thought in the silence of the
Ineffable. A stilling of the mental thought may be part of the discipline, when the object is to free the mind from
its own partial workings, in order that it may become an equal channel of a higher light and knowledge; but there
must also be a transformation of the mental substance; otherwise the higher light cannot assume full possession
and a compelling shape for the ordered works of the divine consciousness in the human being. The silence of the
Ineffable is a truth of divine being, but the Word which proceeds from that silence is also a truth, and it is this
Word which has to be given a body in the conscious form of the nature.
\par But, finally, all this equalisation of the nature is a preparation for the highest spiritual equality to take
possession of the whole being and make a pervading atmosphere in which the light, power and joy of the Divine
can manifest itself in man amid an increasing fullness. That equality is the eternal equality of Sachchidananda. It
is an equality of the infinite being which is self-existent, an equality of the eternal spirit, but it will mould into its
own mould the mind, heart, will, life, physical being. It is an equality of the infinite spiritual consciousness which
will contain and base the blissful flowing and satisfied waves of a
Page 707

divine knowledge. It is an equality of the divine Tapas which will initiate a luminous action of the divine will in all
the nature. It is an equality of the divine Ananda which will found the play of a divine universal delight, universal
love and an illimitable aesthesis of universal beauty. The ideal equal peace and calm of the Infinite will be the
wide ether of our perfected being, but the ideal, equal and perfect action of the Infinite through the nature
working on the relations of the universe will be the untroubled outpouring of its power in our being. This is the
meaning of equality in the terms of the integral Yoga.
Page 708

\par
\hn Chapter XII
\par
\ht The Way of Equality
\par\drop It will appear from the description of the complete and perfect equality that this equality has two sides.
It must therefore be arrived at by two successive movements. One will liberate us from the action of the lower
nature and admit us to the calm peace of the divine being; the other will liberate us into the full being and power
of the higher nature and admit us to the equal poise and universality of a divine and infinite knowledge, will of
action, Ananda. The first may be described as a passive or negative equality, an equality of reception which
fronts impassively the impacts and phenomena of existence and negates the dualities of the appearances and
reactions which they impose on us. The second is an active, a positive equality which accepts the phenomena of
existence, but only as the manifestation of the one divine being and with an equal response to them which comes
from the divine nature in us and transforms them into its hidden values. The first lives in the peace of the one
Brahman and puts away from it the nature of the active Ignorance. The second lives in that peace, but also in the
Ananda of the Divine and imposes on the life of the soul in nature the signs of the divine knowledge, power and
bliss of being. It is this double orientation united by the common principle which will determine the movement of
equality in the integral Yoga.
\par The effort towards a passive or purely receptive equality may start from three different principles or
attitudes which all lead to the same result and ultimate consequence,—endurance, indifference and submission.
The principle of endurance relies on the strength of the spirit within us to bear all the contacts, impacts,
suggestions of this phenomenal Nature that besieges us on every side without being overborne by them and
compelled to bear their emotional, sensational, dynamic, intellectual reactions. The outer mind in the lower nature
has not this strength.
Page 709

Its strength is that of a limited force of consciousness which has to do the best it can with all that comes in upon
it or besieges it from the greater whirl of consciousness and energy which environs it on this plane of existence.
That it can maintain itself at all and affirm its individual being in the universe, is due indeed to the strength of the
spirit within it, but it cannot bring forward the whole of that strength or the infinity of that force to meet the
attacks of life; if it could, it would be at once the equal and master of its world. In fact, it has to manage as it
can. It meets certain impacts and is able to assimilate, equate or master them partially or completely, for a time
or wholly, and then it has in that degree the emotional and sensational reactions of joy, pleasure, satisfaction,
liking, love, etc., or the intellectual and mental reactions of acceptance, approval, understanding, knowledge,
preference, and on these its will seizes with attraction, desire, the attempt to prolong, to repeat, to create, to
possess, to make them the pleasurable habit of its life. Other impacts it meets, but finds them too strong for it or
too dissimilar and discordant or too weak to give it satisfaction; these are things which it cannot bear or cannot
equate with itself or cannot assimilate, and it is obliged to give to them reactions of grief, pain, discomfort,
dissatisfaction, disliking, disapproval, rejection, inability to understand or know, refusal of admission. Against them
it seeks to protect itself, to escape from them, to avoid or minimise their recurrence; it has with regard to them
movements of fear, anger, shrinking, horror, aversion, disgust, shame, would gladly be delivered from them, but it
cannot get away from them, for it is bound to and even invites their causes and therefore the results; for these
impacts are part of life, tangled up with the things we desire, and the inability to deal with them is part of the
imperfection of our nature. Other impacts again the normal mind succeeds in holding at bay or neutralising and to
these it has a natural reaction of indifference, insensibility or tolerance which is neither positive acceptance and
enjoyment nor rejection or suffering. To things, persons, happenings, ideas, workings, whatever presents itself to
the mind, there are always these three kinds of reaction. At the same time, in spite of their
Page 710

generality, there is nothing absolute about them; they form a scheme for a habitual scale which is not precisely
the same for all or even for the same mind at different times or in different conditions. The same impact may
arouse in it at one time and another the pleasurable or positive, the adverse or negative or the indifferent or
neutral reactions.
\par The soul which seeks mastery may begin by turning upon these reactions the encountering and opposing
force of a strong and equal endurance. Instead of seeking to protect itself from or to shun and escape the
unpleasant impacts it may confront them and teach itself to suffer and to bear them with perseverance, with
fortitude, an increasing equanimity or an austere or calm acceptance. This attitude, this discipline brings out three
results, three powers of the soul in relation to things. First, it is found that what was before unbearable, becomes
easy to endure; the scale of the power that meets the impact rises in degree; it needs a greater and greater force
of it or of its protracted incidence to cause trouble, pain, grief, aversion or any other of the notes in the gamut of
the unpleasant reactions. Secondly, it is found that the conscious nature divides itself into two parts, one of the
normal mental and emotional nature in which the customary reactions continue to take place, another of the
higher will and reason which observes and is not troubled or affected by the passion of this lower nature, does
not accept it as its own, does not approve, sanction or participate. Then the lower nature begins to lose the force
and power of its reactions, to submit to the suggestions of calm and strength from the higher reason and will, and
gradually that calm and strength take possession of the mental and emotional, even of the sensational, vital and
physical being. This brings the third power and result, the power by this endurance and mastery, this separation
and rejection of the lower nature, to get rid of the normal reactions and even, if we will, to remould all our modes
of experience by the strength of the spirit. This method is applied not only to the unpleasant, but also to the
pleasant reactions; the soul refuses to give itself up to or be carried away by them; it endures with calm the
impacts which bring joy and pleasure; refuses to be excited by
Page 711

them and replaces the joy and eager seeking of the mind after pleasant things by the calm of the spirit. It can be
applied too to the thought-mind in a calm reception of knowledge and of limitation of knowledge which refuses to
be carried away by the fascination of this attractive or repelled by dislike for that unaccustomed or unpalatable
thought-suggestion and waits on the Truth with a detached observation which allows it to grow on the strong,
disinterested, mastering will and reason. Thus the soul becomes gradually equal to all things, master of itself,
adequate to meet the world with a strong front in the mind and an undisturbed serenity of the spirit.
\par The second way is an attitude of impartial indifference. Its method is to reject at once the attraction or the
repulsion of things, to cultivate for them a luminous impassivity, an inhibiting rejection, a habit of dissociation and
desuetude. This attitude reposes less on the will, though will is always necessary, than on the knowledge. It is an
attitude which regards these passions of the mind as things born of the illusion of the outward mentality or
inferior movements unworthy of the calm truth of the single and equal spirit or a vital and emotional disturbance
to be rejected by the tranquil observing will and dispassionate intelligence of the sage. It puts away desire from
the mind, discards the ego which attributes these dual values to things, and replaces desire by an impartial and
indifferent peace and ego by the pure self which is not troubled, excited or unhinged by the impacts of the world.
And not only is the emotional mind quieted, but the intellectual being also rejects the thoughts of the ignorance
and rises beyond the interests of an inferior knowledge to the one truth that is eternal and without change. This
way too develops three results or powers by which it ascends to peace.
\par First, it is found that the mind is voluntarily bound by the petty joys and troubles of life and that in reality
these can have no inner hold on it, if the soul simply chooses to cast off its habit of helpless determination by
external and transient things. Secondly, it is found that here too a division can be made, a psychological partition
between the lower or outward mind still subservient to the old habitual touches and the higher reason and
Page 712

will which stand back to live in the indifferent calm of the spirit. There grows on us, in other words, an inner
separate calm which watches the commotion of the lower members without taking part in it or giving it any
sanction. At first the higher reason and will may be often clouded, invaded, the mind carried away by the
incitation of the lower members, but eventually this calm becomes inexpugnable, permanent, not to be shaken by
the most violent touches, \s{na du\,hkhena guru\,n\=api vic\=alyate}. This inner soul of calm regards the trouble of the
outer mind with a detached superiority or a passing uninvolved indulgence such as might be given to the trivial
joys and griefs of a child, it does not regard them as its own or as reposing on any permanent reality. And, finally,
the outer mind too accepts by degrees this calm and indifferent serenity; it ceases to be attracted by the things
that attracted it or troubled by the griefs and pains to which it had the habit of attaching an unreal importance.
Thus the third power comes, an all-pervading power of wide tranquillity and peace, a bliss of release from the
siege of our imposed fantastic self-torturing nature, the deep undisturbed exceeding happiness of the touch of the
eternal and infinite replacing by its permanence the strife and turmoil of impermanent
things,\s{brahmasa\.mspar\'sam atyanta\.m sukham a\'snute}. The soul is fixed in the delight of the self, \s{\=atmarati\,h},
in the single and infinite Ananda of the spirit and hunts no more after outward touches and their griefs and
pleasures. It observes the world only as the spectator of a play or action in which it is no longer compelled to
participate.
\par The third way is that of submission, which may be the Christian resignation founded on submission to the will
of God, or an unegoistic acceptance of things and happenings as a manifestation of the universal Will in time, or a
complete surrender of the person to the Divine, to the supreme Purusha. As the first was a way of the will and
the second a way of knowledge, of the understanding reason, so this is a way of the temperament and heart and
very intimately connected with the principle of Bhakti. If it is pushed to the end, it arrives at the same result of a
perfect equality. For the knot of the ego is loosened and the personal
Page 713

claim begins to disappear, we find that we are no longer bound to joy in things pleasant or sorrow over the
unpleasant; we bear them without either eager acceptance or troubled rejection, refer them to the Master of our
being, concern ourselves less and less with their personal result to us and hold only one thing of importance, to
approach God, or to be in touch and tune with the universal and infinite Existence, or to be united with the Divine,
his channel, instrument, servant, lover, rejoicing in him and in our relation with him and having no other object or
cause of joy or sorrow. Here too there may be for some time a division between the lower mind of habitual
emotions and the higher psychical mind of love and self-giving, but eventually the former yields, changes,
transforms itself, is swallowed up in the love, joy, delight of the Divine and has no other interests or attractions.
Then all within is the equal peace and bliss of that union, the one silent bliss that passes understanding, the peace
that abides untouched by the solicitation of lower things in the depths of our spiritual existence.
\par These three ways coincide in spite of their separate starting-points, first, by their inhibition of the normal
reactions of the mind to the touches of outward things, \s{b\=ahya-spar\'s\=an}, secondly, by their separation of the
self or spirit from the outward action of Nature. But it is evident that our perfection will be greater and more
embracingly complete, if we can have a more active equality which will enable us not only to draw back from or
confront the world in a detached and separated calm, but to return upon it and possess it in the power of the calm
and equal Spirit. This is possible because the world, Nature, action are not in fact a quite separate thing, but a
manifestation of the Self, the All-Soul, the Divine. The reactions of the normal mind are a degradation of the
divine values which would but for this degradation make this truth evident to us,—a falsification, an ignorance
which alters their workings, an ignorance which starts from the involution of the Self in a blind material
nescience. Once we return to the full consciousness of Self, of God, we can then put a true divine value on
things and receive and act on them with the calm, joy, knowledge, seeing will of the Spirit. When
Page 714

we begin to do that, then the soul begins to have an equal joy in the universe, an equal will dealing with all
energies, an equal knowledge which takes possession of the spiritual truth behind all the phenomena of this divine
manifestation. It possesses the world as the Divine possesses it, in a fullness of the infinite light, power and
Ananda.
\par All this existence can therefore be approached by a Yoga of positive and active in place of the negative and
passive equality. This requires, first, a new knowledge which is the knowledge of unity,—to see all things as
oneself and to see all things in God and God in all things. There is then a will of equal acceptance of all
phenomena, all events, all happenings, all persons and forces as masks of the Self, movements of the one energy,
results of the one power in action, ruled by the one divine wisdom; and on the foundation of this will of greater
knowledge there grows a strength to meet everything with an untroubled soul and mind. There must be an
identification of myself with the self of the universe, a vision and a feeling of oneness with all creatures, a
perception of all forces and energies and results as the movement of this energy of my self and therefore
intimately my own; not, obviously, of my ego-self which must be silenced, eliminated, cast away,—otherwise this
perfection cannot come,—but of a greater impersonal or universal self with which I am now one. For my
personality is now only one centre of action of that universal self, but a centre intimately in relation and unison
with all other personalities and also with all those other things which are to us only impersonal objects and forces:
but in fact they also are powers of the one impersonal Person (Purusha), God, Self and Spirit. My individuality is
his and is no longer a thing incompatible with or separated from universal being; it is itself universalised, a knower
of the universal Ananda and one with and a lover of all that it knows, acts on and enjoys. For to the equal
knowledge of the universe and equal will of acceptance of the universe will be added an equal delight in all the
cosmic manifestation of the Divine.
\par Here too we may describe three results or powers of the method. First, we develop this power of equal
acceptance in
Page 715

the spirit and in the higher reason and will which respond to the spiritual knowledge. But also we find that though
the nature can be induced to take this general attitude, there is yet a struggle between that higher reason and will
and the lower mental being which clings to the old egoistic way of seeing the world and reacting to its impacts.
Then we find that these two, though at first confused, mingled together, alternating, acting on each other, striving
for possession, can be divided, the higher spiritual disengaged from the lower mental nature. But in this stage,
while the mind is still subject to reactions of grief, trouble, an inferior joy and pleasure, there is an increased
difficulty which does not act to the same extent in a more sharply individualised Yoga. For not only does the mind
feel its own troubles and difficulties, but it shares in the joys and griefs of others, vibrates to them in a poignant
sympathy, feels their impacts with a subtle sensitiveness, makes them its own; not only so, but the difficulties of
others are added to our own and the forces which oppose the perfection act with a greater persistence, because
they feel this movement to be an attack upon and an attempt to conquer their universal kingdom and not merely
the escape of an isolated soul from their empire. But finally, we find too that there comes a power to surmount
these difficulties; the higher reason and will impose themselves on the lower mind, which sensibly changes into
the vast types of the spiritual nature; it takes even a delight in feeling, meeting and surmounting all troubles,
obstacles and difficulties until they are eliminated by its own transformation. Then the whole being lives in a final
power, the universal calm and joy, the seeing delight and will of the Spirit in itself and its manifestation.
\par To see how this positive method works, we may note very briefly its principle in the three great powers of
knowledge, will and feeling. All emotion, feeling, sensation is a way of the soul meeting and putting effective
values on the manifestations of the Self in nature. But what the self feels is a universal delight, Ananda. The soul
in the lower mind on the contrary gives it, as we have seen, three varying values of pain, pleasure and neutral
indifference, which tone by gradations of less and more into each
Page 716

other, and this gradation depends on the power of the individualised consciousness to meet, sense, assimilate,
equate, master all that comes in on it from all of the greater self which it has by separative individualisation put
outside of it and made as if not-self to its experience. But all the time, because of the greater Self within us, there
is a secret soul which takes delight in all these things and draws strength from and grows by all that touches it,
profits as much by adverse as by favourable experience. This can make itself felt by the outer desire soul, and
that in fact is why we have a delight in existing and can even take a certain kind of pleasure in struggle, suffering
and the harsher colours of existence. But to get the universal Ananda all our instruments must learn to take not
any partial or perverse, but the essential joy of all things. In all things there is a principle of Ananda, which the
understanding can seize on and the aesthesis feel as the taste of delight in them, their \s{rasa}; but ordinarily they
put upon them instead arbitrary, unequal and contrary values: they have to be led to perceive things in the light of
the spirit and to transform these provisional values into the real, the equal and essential, the spiritual
\sforced{rasa}. The life-principle is there to give this seizing of the principle of delight, \s{rasa-graha\,na}, the
form of a strong possessing enjoyment, \s{bhoga}, which makes the whole life-being vibrate with it and accept
and rejoice in it; but ordinarily it is not, owing to desire, equal to its task, but turns it into the three lower
forms,—pain and pleasure, \s{sukha-bhoga du\,hkha-bhoga}, and that rejection of both which we call insensibility
or indifference. The prana or vital being has to be liberated from desire and its inequalities and to accept and turn
into pure enjoyment the \s{rasa} which the understanding and aesthesis perceive. Then there is no farther
obstacle in the instruments to the third step by which all is changed into the full and pure ecstasy of the spiritual
Ananda.
\par In the matter of knowledge, there are again three \NH reactions of the mind to things, ignorance, error and
true knowledge. The positive equality will accept all three of them to start with as movements of a
self-manifestation which evolves out of \NH ignorance through the partial or distorted knowledge which
Page 717

is the cause of error to true knowledge. It will deal with the ignorance of the mind, as what it is psychologically, a
clouded, veiled or wrapped-up state of the substance of consciousness in which the knowledge of the all-knowing
Self is hidden as if in a dark sheath; it will dwell on it by the mind and by the aid of related truths already known,
by the intelligence or by an intuitive concentration deliver the knowledge out of the veil of the ignorance. It will
not attach itself only to the known or try to force all into its little frame, but will dwell on the known and the
unknown with an equal mind open to all possibility. So too it will deal with error; it will accept the tangled skein of
truth and error, but attach itself to no opinion, rather seeking for the element of truth behind all opinions, the
knowledge concealed within the error,—for all error is a disfiguration of some misunderstood fragments of truth
and draws its vitality from that and not from its misapprehension; it will accept, but not limit itself even by
ascertained truths, but will always be ready for new knowledge and seek for a more and more integral, a more
and more extended, reconciling, unifying wisdom. This can only come in its fullness by rising to the ideal
supermind, and therefore the equal seeker of truth will not be attached to the intellect and its workings or think
that all ends there, but be prepared to rise beyond, accepting each stage of ascent and the contributions of each
power of his being, but only to lift them into a higher truth. He must accept everything, but cling to nothing, be
repelled by nothing however imperfect or however subversive of fixed notions, but also allow nothing to lay hold
on him to the detriment of the free working of the Truth-Spirit. This equality of the intelligence is an essential
condition for rising to the higher supramental and spiritual knowledge.
\par The will in us, because it is the most generally forceful power of our being,—there is a will of knowledge, a
will of life, a will of emotion, a will acting in every part of our nature,—takes many forms and returns various
reactions to things, such as incapacity, limitation of power, mastery, or right will, wrong or perverted will, neutral
volition,—in the ethical mind virtue, sin and non-ethical volition,—and others of the kind.
Page 718

These too the positive equality accepts as a tangle of provisional values from which it must start, but which it
must transform into universal mastery, into the will of the Truth and universal Right, into the freedom of the
divine Will in action. The equal will need not feel remorse, sorrow or discouragement over its stumblings; if these
reactions occur in the habitual mentality, it will only see how far they indicate an imperfection and the thing to be
corrected,—for they are not always just indicators,—and so get beyond them to a calm and equal guidance. It
will see that these stumblings themselves are necessary to experience and in the end steps towards the goal.
Behind and within all that occurs in ourselves and in the world, it will look for the divine meaning and the divine
guidance; it will look beyond imposed limitations to the voluntary self-limitation of the universal Power by which it
regulates its steps and gradations,—imposed on our ignorance, self-imposed in the divine knowledge,—and go
beyond to unity with the illimitable power of the Divine. All energies and actions it will see as forces proceeding
from the one Existence and their perversions as imperfections, inevitable in the developing movement, of powers
that were needed for that movement; it will therefore have charity for all imperfections, even while pressing
steadily towards a universal perfection. This equality will open the nature to the guidance of the divine and
universal Will and make it ready for that supramental action in which the power of the soul in us is luminously full
of and one with the power of the supreme Spirit.
\par The integral Yoga will make use of both the passive and the active methods according to the need of the
nature and the guidance of the inner spirit, the Antaryamin. It will not limit itself by the passive way, for that
would lead only to some individual quietistic salvation or negation of an active and universal spiritual being which
would be inconsistent with the totality of its aim. It will use the method of endurance, but not stop short with a
detached strength and serenity, but move rather to a positive strength and mastery, in which endurance will no
longer be needed, since the self will then be in a calm and powerful spontaneous possession of the universal
energy and capable
Page 719

of determining easily and happily all its reactions in the oneness and the Ananda. It will use the method of
impartial indifference, but not end in an aloof indifference to all things, but rather move towards a high-seated
impartial acceptance of life strong to transform all experience into the greater values of the equal spirit. It will
use too temporarily resignation and submission, but by the full surrender of its personal being to the Divine it will
attain to the all-possessing Ananda in which there is no need of resignation, to the perfect harmony with the
universal which is not merely an acquiescence, but an embracing oneness, to the perfect instrumentality and
subjection of the natural self to the Divine by which the Divine also is possessed by the individual spirit. It will
use fully the positive method, but will go beyond any individual acceptance of things which would have the effect
of turning existence into a field only of the perfected individual knowledge, power and Ananda. That it will have,
but also it will have the oneness by which it can live in the existence of others for their sake and not only for its
own and for their assistance and as one of their means, an associated and helping force in the movement
towards the same perfection. It will live for the Divine, not shunning world-existence, not attached to the earth or
the heavens, not attached either to a supracosmic liberation, but equally one with the Divine in all his planes and
able to live in him equally in the Self and in the manifestation.
Page 720

\par
\hn Chapter XIII
\par
\ht The Action of Equality
\par\drop The distinctions that have already been made, will have shown in sufficiency what is meant by the
status of equality. It is not mere quiescence and indifference, not a withdrawal from experience, but a superiority
to the present reactions of the mind and life. It is the spiritual way of replying to life or rather of embracing it and
compelling it to become a perfect form of action of the self and spirit. It is the first secret of the soul's mastery of
existence. When we have it in perfection, we are admitted to the very ground of the divine spiritual nature. The
mental being in the body tries to compel and conquer life, but is at every turn compelled by it, because it submits
to the desire reactions of the vital self. To be equal, not to be overborne by any stress of desire, is the first
condition of real mastery, self-empire is its basis. But a mere mental equality, however great it may be, is
hampered by the tendency of quiescence. It has to preserve itself from desire by self-limitation in the will and
action. It is only the spirit which is capable of sublime undisturbed rapidities of will as well as an illimitable
patience, equally just in a slow and deliberate or a swift and violent, equally secure in a safely lined and limited or
a vast and enormous action. It can accept the smallest work in the narrowest circle of cosmos, but it can work
too upon the whirl of chaos with an understanding and creative force; and these things it can do because by its
detached and yet intimate acceptance it carries into both an infinite calm, knowledge, will and power. It has that
detachment because it is above all the happenings, forms, ideas and movements it embraces in its scope; and it
has that intimate acceptance because it is yet one with all things. If we have not this free unity, \s{ekatvam
anupa\'syata\,h}, we have not the full equality of the spirit.
\par The first business of the sadhaka is to see whether he has
Page 721

the perfect equality, how far he has gone in this direction or else where is the flaw, and to exercise steadily his
will on his nature or invite the will of the Purusha to get rid of the defect and its causes. There are four things
that he must have; first, equality in the most concrete practical sense of the word, \s{samat\=a}, freedom from
mental, vital, physical preferences, an even acceptance of all God's workings within and around him; secondly, a
firm peace and absence of all disturbance and trouble, \s{\'s\=anti}; thirdly, a positive inner spiritual happiness and
spiritual ease of the natural being which nothing can lessen, \s{sukham}; fourthly, a clear joy and laughter of the
soul embracing life and existence. To be equal is to be infinite and universal, not to limit oneself, not to bind
oneself down to this or that form of the mind and life and its partial preferences and desires. But since man in his
present normal nature lives by his mental and vital formations, not in the freedom of his spirit, attachment to them
and the desires and preferences they involve is also his normal condition. To accept them is at first inevitable, to
get beyond them exceedingly difficult and not, perhaps, altogether possible so long as we are compelled to use
the mind as the chief instrument of our action. The first necessity therefore is to take at least the sting out of
them, to deprive them, even when they persist, of their greater insistence, their present egoism, their more violent
claim on our nature.
\par The test that we have done this is the presence of an undisturbed calm in the mind and spirit. The sadhaka
must be on the watch as the witnessing and willing Purusha behind or, better, as soon as he can manage it, above
the mind, and repel even the least indices or incidence of trouble, anxiety, grief, revolt, disturbance in his mind. If
these things come, he must at once detect their source, the defect which they indicate, the fault of egoistic claim,
vital desire, emotion or idea from which they start and this he must discourage by his will, his spiritualised
intelligence, his soul unity with the Master of his being. On no account must he admit any excuse for them,
however natural, righteous in seeming or plausible, or any inner or outer justification. If it is the prana which is
troubled and clamorous, he
Page 722

must separate himself from the troubled prana, keep seated his higher nature in the buddhi and by the buddhi
school and reject the claim of the desire-soul in him; and so too if it is the heart of emotion that makes the
clamour and the disturbance. If on the other hand it is the will and intelligence itself that is at fault, then the
trouble is more difficult to command, because then his chief aid and instrument becomes an accomplice of the
revolt against the divine Will and the old sins of the lower members take advantage of this sanction to raise their
diminished heads. Therefore there must be a constant insistence on one main idea, the self-surrender to the
Master of our being, God within us and in the world, the supreme Self, the universal Spirit. The buddhi dwelling
always in this master idea must discourage all its own lesser insistences and preferences and teach the whole
being that the ego whether it puts forth its claim through the reason, the personal will, the heart or the desire-soul
in the prana, has no just claim of any kind and all grief, revolt, impatience, trouble is a violence against the Master
of the being.
\par This complete self-surrender must be the chief mainstay of the sadhaka because it is the only way, apart
from complete quiescence and indifference to all action,—and that has to be avoided,—by which the absolute
calm and peace can come. The persistence of trouble, \s{a\'s\=anti}, the length of time taken for this purification
and perfection, itself must not be allowed to become a reason for discouragement and impatience. It comes
because there is still something in the nature which responds to it, and the recurrence of trouble serves to bring
out the presence of the defect, put the sadhaka upon his guard and bring about a more enlightened and consistent
action of the will to get rid of it. When the trouble is too strong to be kept out, it must be allowed to pass and its
return discouraged by a greater vigilance and insistence of the spiritualised buddhi. Thus persisting, it will be
found that these things lose their force more and more, become more and more external and brief in their
recurrence, until finally calm becomes the law of the being. This rule persists so long as the mental buddhi is the
chief instrument; but when the supramental light takes possession of mind and heart, then
Page 723

there can be no trouble, grief or disturbance; for that brings with it a spiritual nature of illumined strength in which
these things can have no place. There the only vibrations and emotions are those which belong to the
\s{\=anandamaya} nature of divine unity.
\par The calm established in the whole being must remain the same whatever happens, in health and disease, in
pleasure and in pain, even in the strongest physical pain, in good fortune and misfortune, our own or that of those
we love, in success and failure, honour and insult, praise and blame, justice done to us or injustice, everything that
ordinarily affects the mind. If we see unity everywhere, if we recognise that all comes by the divine will, see God
in all, in our enemies or rather our opponents in the game of life as well as our friends, in the powers that oppose
and resist us as well as the powers that favour and assist, in all energies and forces and happenings, and if
besides we can feel that all is undivided from our self, all the world one with us within our universal being, then
this attitude becomes much easier to the heart and mind. But even before we can attain or are firmly seated in
that universal vision, we have by all the means in our power to insist on this receptive and active equality and
calm. Even something of it, \s{alpam api asya dharmasya}, is a great step towards perfection; a first firmness in
it is the beginning of liberated perfection; its completeness is the perfect assurance of a rapid progress in all the
other members of perfection. For without it we can have no solid basis; and by the pronounced lack of it we shall
be constantly falling back to the lower status of desire, ego, duality, ignorance.
\par This calm once attained, vital and mental preference has lost its disturbing force; it only remains as a formal
habit of the mind. Vital acceptance or rejection, the greater readiness to welcome this rather than that happening,
the mental acceptance or rejection, the preference of this more congenial to that other less congenial idea or
truth, the dwelling upon the will to this rather than to that other result, become a formal mechanism still necessary
as an index of the direction in which the Shakti is meant to turn or for the present is made to incline by the
Master of our being. But it loses its disturbing aspect of strong egoistic will,
Page 724

\NH intolerant desire, obstinate liking. These appearances may remain for a while in a diminished form, but as
the calm of equality increases, deepens, becomes more essential and compact, \s{ghana}, they disappear, cease
to colour the mental and vital substance or occur only as touches on the most external physical mind, are unable
to penetrate within, and at last even that recurrence, that appearance at the outer gates of mind ceases. Then
there can come the living reality of the perception that all in us is done and directed by the Master of our being,
\s{yath\=a prayukto 'smi, tath\=a karomi}, which was before only a strong idea and faith with occasional and
derivative glimpses of the divine action behind the becomings of our personal nature. Now every movement is
seen to be the form given by the Shakti, the divine power in us, to the indications of the Purusha, still no doubt
personalised, still belittled in the inferior mental form, but not primarily egoistic, an imperfect form, not a positive
deformation. We have then to get beyond this stage even. For the perfect action and experience is not to be
determined by any kind of mental or vital preference, but by the revealing and inspiring spiritual will which is the
Shakti in her direct and real initiation. When I say that as I am appointed, I work, I still bring in a limiting personal
element and mental reaction. But it is the Master who will do his own work through myself as his instrument, and
there must be no mental or other preference in me to limit, to interfere, to be a source of imperfect working. The
mind must become a silent luminous channel for the revelations of the supramental Truth and of the Will involved
in its seeing. Then shall the action be the action of that highest Being and Truth and not a qualified translation or
mistranslation in the mind. Whatever limitation, selection, relation is imposed, will be self-imposed by the Divine
on himself in the individual at the moment for his own purpose, not binding, not final, not an ignorant
determination of the mind. The thought and will become then an action from a luminous Infinite, a formulation not
excluding other formulations, but rather putting them into their just place in relation to itself, englobing or
transforming them even and proceeding to larger formations of the divine knowledge and action.
Page 725

\par The first calm that comes is of the nature of peace, the absence of all unquiet, grief and disturbance. As the
equality becomes more intense, it takes on a fuller substance of positive happiness and spiritual ease. This is the
joy of the spirit in itself, dependent on nothing external for its absolute existence, \s{nir\=a\'sraya}, as the Gita
describes it, \sforced{anta\,h-sukho antar\=ar\=ama\,h}, an exceeding inner happiness,\s{brahmasa\.mspar\'sam atyanta\.m
sukham a\'snute}. Nothing can disturb it, and it extends itself to the soul's view of outward things, imposes on
them too the law of this quiet spiritual joy. For the base of it is still calm, it is an even and tranquil neutral joy,
\s{ahaituka}. And as the supramental light grows, a greater Ananda comes, the base of the abundant ecstasy of
the spirit in all it is, becomes, sees, experiences and of the laughter of the Shakti doing luminously the work of the
Divine and taking his Ananda in all the worlds.
\par The perfected action of equality transforms all the values of things on the basis of the divine
\s{\=anandamaya} power. The outward action may remain what it was or may change, that must be as the Spirit
directs and according to the need of the work to be done for the world,—but the whole inner action is of another
kind. The Shakti in its different powers of knowledge, action, enjoyment, creation, formulation, will direct itself to
the different aims of existence, but in another spirit; they will be the aims, the fruits, the lines of working laid
down by the Divine from his light above, not anything claimed by the ego for its own separate sake. The mind,
the heart, the vital being, the body itself will be satisfied with whatever comes to them from the dispensation of
the Master of the being and in that find a subtlest and yet fullest spiritualised satisfaction and delight; but the
divine knowledge and will above will work forward towards its farther ends. Here both success and failure lose
their present meanings. There can be no failure; for whatever happens is the intention of the Master of the
worlds, not final, but a step on his way, and if it appears as an opposition, a defeat, a denial, even for the moment
a total denial of the aim set before the instrumental being, it is so only in appearance and afterwards it will appear
in its right place in the economy of his action,—a
Page 726

fuller supramental vision may even see at once or beforehand its necessity and its true relation to the eventual
result to which it seems so contrary and even perhaps its definite prohibition. Or, if—while the light is
deficient—there has been a misinterpretation whether with regard to the aim or the course of the action and the
steps of the result, the failure comes as a rectification and is calmly accepted without bringing discouragement or
a fluctuation of the will. In the end it is found that there is no such thing as failure and the soul takes an equal
passive or active delight in all happenings as the steps and formulations of the divine Will. The same evolution
takes place with regard to good fortune and ill fortune, the pleasant and the unpleasant in every form, \s{ma\.ngala
ama\.ngala}, \s{priya apriya}.
\par And as with happenings, so with persons, equality brings an entire change of the view and the attitude. The
first result of the equal mind and spirit is to bring about an increasing charity and inner toleration of all persons,
ideas, views, actions, because it is seen that God is in all beings and each acts according to his nature, his
\s{svabh\=ava}, and its present formulations. When there is the positive equal Ananda, this deepens to a
sympathetic understanding and in the end an equal universal love. None of these things need prevent various
relations or different formulations of the inner attitude according to the need of life as determined by the spiritual
will, or firm furtherings of this idea, view, action against that other for the same need and purpose by the same
determination, or a strong outward or inward resistance, opposition and action against the forces that are impelled
to stand in the way of the decreed movement. And there may be even the rush of the Rudra energy forcefully
working upon or shattering the human or other obstacle, because that is necessary both for him and for the world
purpose. But the essence of the equal inmost attitude is not altered or diminished by these more superficial
formulations. The spirit, the fundamental soul remain the same, even while the Shakti of knowledge, will, action,
love does its work and assumes the various forms needed for its work. And in the end all becomes a form of a
luminous spiritual unity with all persons, energies, things in the being of God and
Page 727

in the luminous, spiritual, one and universal force, in which one's own action becomes an inseparable part of the
action of all, is not divided from it, but feels perfectly every relation as a relation with God in all in the complex
terms of his universal oneness. That is a plenitude which can hardly be described in the language of the dividing
mental reason for it uses all its oppositions, yet escapes from them, nor can it be put in the terms of our limited
mental psychology. It belongs to another domain of consciousness, another plane of our being.
Page 728

\par
\hn Chapter XIV
\par
\ht The Power of the Instruments
\par\drop The second member of the Yoga of self-perfection is the heightened, enlarged and rectified power of
the instruments of our normal Nature. The cultivation of this second perfection need not wait for the security of
the equal mind and spirit, but it is only in that security that it can become complete and act in the safety of the
divine leading. The object of this cultivation is to make the nature a fit instrument for divine works. All work is
done by power, by Shakti, and since the integral Yoga does not contemplate abandonment of works, but rather a
doing of all works from the divine consciousness and with the supreme guidance, the characteristic powers of the
instruments, mind, life and body, must not only be purified of defects, but raised to a capacity for this greater
action. In the end they must undergo a spiritual and supramental transfiguration.
\par There are four members of this second part of the sadhana or discipline of self-perfection and the first of
them is right shakti, the right condition of the powers of the intelligence, heart, vital mind and body. It will only be
possible at present to suggest a preliminary perfection of the last of these four, for the full siddhi will have to be
dealt with after I have spoken of the supermind and its influence on the rest of the being. The body is not only
the necessary outer instrument of the physical part of action, but for the purposes of this life a base or pedestal
also for all inner action. All working of mind or spirit has its vibration in the physical consciousness, records itself
there in a kind of subordinate corporeal notation and communicates itself to the material world partly at least
through the physical machine. But the body of man has natural limitations in this capacity which it imposes on the
play of the higher parts of his being. And, secondly, it has a subconscient consciousness of its own in which it
keeps with an obstinate fidelity the past habits and past nature of the mental
Page 729

and vital being and which automatically opposes and obstructs any very great upward change or at least prevents
it from becoming a radical transformation of the whole nature. It is evident that if we are to have a free divine or
spiritual and supramental action conducted by the force and fulfilling the character of a diviner energy, some
fairly complete transformation must be effected in this outward character of the bodily nature. The physical
being of man has always been felt by the seekers of perfection to be a great impediment and it has been the
habit to turn from it with contempt, denial or aversion and a desire to suppress altogether or as far as may be the
body and the physical life. But this cannot be the right method for the integral Yoga. The body is given us as one
instrument necessary to the totality of our works and it is to be used, not neglected, hurt, suppressed or abolished.
If it is imperfect, recalcitrant, obstinate, so are also the other members, the vital being, heart and mind and
reason. It has like them to be changed and perfected and to undergo a transformation. As we must get ourselves
a new life, new heart, new mind, so we have in a certain sense to build for ourselves a new body.
\par The first thing the will has to do with the body is to impose on it progressively a new habit of all its being,
consciousness, force and outward and inward action. It must be taught an entire passivity in the hands first of the
higher instruments, but eventually in the hands of the spirit and its controlling and informing Shakti. It must be
accustomed not to impose its own limits on the nobler members, but to shape its action and its response to their
demands, to develop, one might say, a higher notation, a higher scale of responses. At present the notation of the
body and the physical consciousness has a very large determining power on the music made by this human harp
of God; the notes we get from the spirit, from the psychic soul, from the greater life behind our physical life
cannot come in freely, cannot develop their high, powerful and proper strain. This condition must be reversed; the
body and the physical consciousness must develop the habit of admitting and shaping themselves to these higher
strains and not they, but the nobler parts of the nature must determine the music of our life and being.
Page 730

\par The control of the body and life by the mind and its thought and will is the first step towards this change. All
Yoga implies the carrying of that control to a very high pitch. But afterwards the mind must itself give place to
the spirit, to the spiritual force, the supermind and the supramental force. And finally the body must develop a
perfect power to hold whatever force is brought into it by the spirit and to contain its action without spilling and
wasting it or itself getting cracked. It must be capable of being filled and powerfully used by whatever intensity
of spiritual or higher mind or life force without any part of the mechanical instrument being agitated, upset,
broken or damaged by the inrush or pressure,—as the brain, vital health or moral nature are often injured in those
who unwisely attempt Yogic practice without preparation or by undue means or rashly invite a power they are
intellectually, vitally, morally unfit to bear,—and, thus filled, it must have the capacity to work normally,
automatically, rightly according to the will of that spiritual or other now unusual agent without distorting,
diminishing or mistranslating its intention and stress. This faculty of holding, \sforced{dh\=ara\,na-\'sakti}, in the
physical consciousness, energy and machinery is the most important siddhi or perfection of the body.
\par The result of these changes will be to make the body a perfect instrument of the spirit. The spiritual force
will be able to do what it wills and as it wills in and through the body. It will be able to conduct an unlimited action
of the mind or at a higher stage of the supermind without the body betraying the action by fatigue, incapacity,
inaptitude or falsification. It will be able too to pour a full tide of the life-force into the body and conduct a large
action and joy of the perfected vital being without that quarrel and disparity which is the relation of the normal
life-instincts and life-impulses to the insufficient physical instrument they are obliged to use. And it will also be
able to conduct a full action of the spiritualised psychic being not falsified, degraded or in any way marred by the
lower instincts of the body and to use physical action and expression as a free notation of the higher psychical
life. And in the body itself there will be a presence of a greatness of sustaining force, an abounding strength,
energy and
Page 731

puissance of outgoing and managing force, a lightness, swiftness and adaptability of the nervous and physical
being, a holding and responsive power in the whole physical machine and its driving springs
\note{\s{mahattva}, \s{bala}, \s{laghut\=a}, \s{dh\=ara\,na-s\=amarthya}.} of which it is now even at its strongest and
best incapable.
\par This energy will not be in its essence an outward, physical or muscular strength, but will be of the nature,
first, of an unbounded life-power or pranic force, secondly, sustaining and using this pranic energy, a superior or
supreme will-power acting in the body. The play of the pranic shakti in the body or form is the condition of all
action, even of the most apparently inanimate physical action. It is the universal Prana, as the ancients knew,
which in various forms sustains or drives material energy in all physical things from the electron and atom and
gas up through the metal, plant, animal, physical man. To get this pranic shakti to act more freely and forcibly in
the body is knowingly or unknowingly the attempt of all who strive for a greater perfection of or in the body. The
ordinary man tries to command it mechanically by physical exercises and other corporeal means, the Hathayogin
more greatly and flexibly, but still mechanically by Asana and Pranayama; but for our purpose it can be
commanded by more subtle, essential and pliable means; first, by a will in the mind widely opening itself to and
potently calling in the universal pranic shakti on which we draw and fixing its stronger presence and more
powerful working in the body; secondly, by the will in the mind opening itself rather to the spirit and its power and
calling in a higher pranic energy from above, a supramental pranic force; thirdly, the last step, by the highest
supramental will of the spirit entering and taking up directly the task of the perfection of the body. In fact, it is
always really a will within which drives and makes effective the pranic instrument even when it uses what seem
to be purely physical means; but at first it is dependent on the inferior action. When we go higher, the relation is
gradually reversed; it is then able to act in its own power or handle the rest only as a subordinate instrumentation.
Page 732

\par Most men are not conscious of this pranic force in the body or cannot distinguish it from the more physical
form of energy which it informs and uses for its vehicle. But as the consciousness becomes more subtle by
practice of Yoga, we can come to be aware of the sea of pranic shakti around us, feel it with the mental
consciousness, concretely with a mental sense, see its courses and movements, and direct and act upon it
immediately by the will. But until we thus become aware of it, we have to possess a working or at least an
experimental faith in its presence and in the power of the will to develop a greater command and use of this
prana force. There is necessary a faith, \s{\'sraddh\=a}, in the power of the mind to lay its will on the state and
action of the body, such as those have who heal disease by faith, will or mental action; but we must seek this
control not only for this or any other limited use, but generally as a legitimate power of the inner and greater over
the outer and lesser instrument. This faith is combated by our past habits of mind, by our actual normal
experience of its comparative helplessness in our present imperfect system and by an opposing belief in the body
and physical consciousness. For they too have a limiting \s{\'sraddh\=a} of their own which opposes the idea in the
mind when it seeks to impose on the system the law of a higher yet unattained perfection. But as we persist and
find this power giving evidence of itself to our experience, the faith in the mind will be able to found itself more
firmly and grow in vigour and the opposing faith in the body will change, admit what it first denied and not only
accept in its habits the new yoke but itself call for this higher action. Finally we shall realise the truth that this
being we are is or can become whatever it has the faith and will to be,—for faith is only a will aiming at greater
truth,—and cease to set limits to our possibility or deny the potential omnipotence of the Self in us, the divine
Power working through the human instrument. That however, at least as a practical force, comes in at a later
stage of high perfection.
\par The Prana is not only a force for the action of physical and vital energy, but supports also the mental and
spiritual action. Therefore the full and free working of the pranic shakti
Page 733

is \NH required not only for the lower but still necessary use, but also for the free and full operation of mind and
supermind and spirit in the instrumentality of our complex human nature. That is the main sense of the use of
exercises of Pranayama for control of the vital force and its motions which is so important and indispensable a
part of certain systems of Yoga. The same mastery must be got by the seeker of the integral Yoga; but he may
arrive at it by other means and in any case he must not be dependent on any physical or breathing exercise for its
possession and maintenance, for that will at once bring in a limitation and subjection to Prakriti. Her
instrumentation has to be used flexibly by the Purusha, but not to be a fixed control on the Purusha. The
necessity of the pranic force, however, remains and will be evident to our self-study and experience. It is in the
Vedic image the steed and conveyance of the embodied mind and will, \s{v\=ahana}. If it is full of strength and
swiftness and a plenitude of all its powers, then the mind can go on the courses of its action with a plenary and
unhampered movement. But if it is lame or soon tired or sluggish or weak, then an incapacity is laid on the
effectuation of the will and activity of the mind. The same rule holds good of the supermind when it first comes
into action. There are indeed states and activities in which the mind takes up the pranic shakti into itself and this
dependence is not felt at all; but even then the force is there, though involved in the pure mental energy. The
supermind, when it gets into full strength, can do pretty well what it likes with the pranic shakti, and we find that
in the end this life power is transformed into the type of a supramentalised prana which is simply one motor
power of that greater consciousness. But this belongs to a later stage of the siddhi of the Yoga.
\par Then again there is the psychic prana, pranic mind or desire soul; this too calls for its own perfection. Here
too the first necessity is a fullness of the vital capacity in the mind, its power to do its full work, to take
possession of all the impulsions and energies given to our inner psychic life for fulfilment in this existence, to hold
them and to be a means for carrying them out with strength, freedom, perfection. Many of the things we
Page 734

need for our perfection, courage, will-power effective in life, all the elements of what we now call force of
character and force of personality, depend very largely for their completest strength and spring of energetic
action on the fullness of the psychic prana. But along with this fullness there must be an established gladness,
clearness and purity in the psychic life-being. This dynamis must not be a troubled, perfervid, stormy, fitfully or
crudely passionate strength; energy there must be, rapture of its action it must have, but a clear and glad and
pure energy, a seated and firmly supported pure rapture. And as a third condition of its perfection it must be
poised in a complete equality. The desire-soul must get rid of the clamour, insistence or inequality of its desires in
order that its desires may be satisfied with justice and balance and in the right way and eventually must rid them
of the character of desire altogether and change them into impulsions of the divine Ananda. To that end it must
make no demands nor seek to impose itself on heart, mind or spirit, but accept with a strong passive and active
equality whatever impulsion and command come into it from the spirit through the channel of a still mind and a
pure heart. And it must accept too whatever result of the impulse, whatever enjoyment more or less, full or nil, is
given to it by the Master of our being. At the same time, possession and enjoyment are its law, function, use,
swadharma. It is not intended to be a slain or mortified thing, dull in its receptive power, dreary, suppressed,
maimed, inert or null. It must have a full power of possession, a glad power of enjoyment, an exultant power of
pure and divine passion and rapture. The enjoyment it will have will be in the essence a spiritual bliss, but one
which takes up into itself and transforms the mental, emotional, dynamic, vital and physical joy; it must have
therefore an integral capacity for these things and must not by incapacity or fatigue or inability to bear great
intensities fail the spirit, mind, heart, will and body. Fullness, clear purity and gladness, equality, capacity for
possession and enjoyment are the fourfold perfection of the psychic prana.
\note{\s{p\=ur\,nat\=a}, \s{prasannat\=a}, \s{samat\=a}, \s{bhoga-s\=amarthya}.}
Page 735

\par The next instrument which needs perfection is the \s{citta}, and within the complete meaning of this
expression we may include the emotional and the pure psychical being. This heart and psychic being of man shot
through with the threads of the life instincts is a thing of mixed inconstant colours of emotion and soul vibrations,
bad and good, happy and unhappy, satisfied and unsatisfied, troubled and calm, intense and dull. Thus agitated
and invaded it is unacquainted with any real peace, incapable of a steady perfection of all its powers. By
purification, by equality, by the light of knowledge, by a harmonising of the will it can be brought to a tranquil
intensity and perfection. The first two elements of this perfection are on one side a high and large sweetness,
openness, gentleness, calm, clarity, on the other side a strong and ardent force and intensity. In the divine no less
than in ordinary human character and action there are always two strands, sweetness and strength, mildness and
force, \s{saumya} and \s{raudra}, the force that bears and harmonises, the force that imposes itself and
compels, Vishnu and Ishana, Shiva and Rudra. The two are equally necessary to a perfect world-action. The
perversions of the Rudra power in the heart are stormy passion, wrath and fierceness and harshness, hardness,
brutality, cruelty, egoistic ambition and love of violence and domination. These and other human perversions have
to be got rid of by the flowering of a calm, clear and sweet psychical being.
\par But on the other hand incapacity of force is also an imperfection. Laxity and weakness, self-indulgence, a
certain flabbiness and limpness or inert passivity of the psychical being are the last result of an emotional and
psychic life in which energy and power of assertion have been quelled, discouraged or killed. Nor is it a total
perfection to have only the strength that endures or to cultivate only a heart of love, charity, tolerance, mildness,
meekness and forbearance. The other side of perfection is a self-contained and calm and unegoistic
Rudra-power armed with psychic force, the energy of the strong heart which is capable of supporting without
shrinking an insistent, an outwardly austere or even, where need is, a violent action. An unlimited light of energy,
force, puissance harmonised with sweetness of heart and
Page 736

clarity, capable of being one with it in action, the lightning of Indra starting from the orb of the nectarous
moon-rays of Soma is the double perfection. And these two things \s{saumyatva}, \s{tejas}, must base their
presence and action on a firm equality of the temperament and of the psychical soul delivered from all crudity
and all excess or defect of the heart's light or the heart's power.
\par Another necessary element is a faith in the heart, a belief in and will to the universal good, an openness to
the universal Ananda. The pure psychic being is of the essence of Ananda, it comes from the delight-soul in the
universe; but the superficial heart of emotion is overborne by the conflicting appearances of the world and
suffers many reactions of grief, fear, depression, passion, short-lived and partial joy. An equal heart is needed for
perfection, but not only a passive equality; there must be the sense of a divine power making for good behind all
experiences, a faith and will which can turn the poisons of the world to nectar, see the happier spiritual intention
behind adversity, the mystery of love behind suffering, the flower of divine strength and joy in the seed of pain.
This faith, \s{kaly\=a\,na-\'sraddh\=a}, is needed in order that the heart and the whole overt psychic being may respond
to the secret divine Ananda and change itself into this true original essence. This faith and will must be
accompanied by and open into an illimitable widest and intensest capacity for love. For the main business of the
heart, its true function is love. It is our destined instrument of complete union and oneness; for to see oneness in
the world by the understanding is not enough unless we also feel it with the heart and in the psychic being, and
this means a delight in the One and in all existences in the world in him, a love of God and all beings. The heart's
faith and will in good are founded on a perception of the one Divine immanent in all things and leading the world.
The universal love has to be founded on the heart's sight and psychical and emotional sense of the one Divine,
the one Self in all existence. All four elements will then form a unity and even the Rudra power to do battle for
the right and the good proceed on the basis of a power of universal love. This is the highest and the most
characteristic perfection of the heart, \s{prema-s\=amarthya}.
Page 737

\par The last perfection is that of the intelligence and thinking mind, \s{buddhi}. The first need is the clarity and
the purity of the intelligence. It must be freed from the claims of the vital being which seeks to impose the desire
of the mind in place of the truth, from the claims of the troubled emotional being which strives to colour, distort,
limit and falsify the truth with the hue and shape of the emotions. It must be free too from its own defect, inertia
of the thought-power, obstructive narrowness and unwillingness to open to knowledge, intellectual
unscrupulousness in thinking, prepossession and preference, self-will in the reason and false determination of the
will to knowledge. Its sole will must be to make itself an unsullied mirror of the truth, its essence and its forms
and measures and relations, a clear mirror, a just measure, a fine and subtle instrument of harmony, an integral
intelligence. This clear and pure intelligence can then become a serene thing of light, a pure and strong radiance
emanating from the sun of Truth. But, again, it must become not merely a thing of concentrated dry or white
light, but capable of all variety of understanding, supple, rich, flexible, brilliant with all the flame and various with
all the colours of the manifestation of the Truth, open to all its forms. And so equipped it will get rid of limitations,
not be shut up in this or that faculty or form or working of knowledge, but an instrument ready and capable for
whatever work is demanded from it by the Purusha. Purity, clear radiance, rich and flexible variety, integral
capacity are the fourfold perfection of the thinking intelligence, \s{vi\'suddhi}, \s{prak\=a\'sa}, \s{vicitra-bodha},
\s{sarva-j\~n\=ana-s\=amarthya}.
\par The normal instruments thus perfected will act each in its own kind without undue interference from each
other and serve the unobstructed will of the Purusha in a harmonised totality of our natural being. This perfection
must rise constantly in its capacity for action, the energy and force of its working and a certain greatness of the
scope of the total nature. They will then be ready for the transformation into their own supramental action in
which they will find a more absolute, unified and luminous spiritual truth of the whole perfected nature. The
means of this perfection of the instruments we shall have to
Page 738

consider later on; but at present it will be enough to say that the principal conditions are will, self-watching and
self-knowledge and a constant practice, \s{abhy\=asa}, of self-modification and transformation. The Purusha has
that capacity; for the spirit within can always change and perfect the working of its nature. But the mental being
must open the way by a clear and a watchful introspection, an opening of itself to a searching and subtle
self-knowledge which will give it the understanding and to an increasing extent the mastery of its natural
instruments, a vigilant and insistent will of self-modification and self-transformation—for to that will the Prakriti
must with whatever difficulty and whatever initial or prolonged resistance eventually respond,—and an unfailing
practice which will constantly reject all defect and perversion and replace it by right state and a right and
enhanced working. Askesis, tapasya, patience and faithfulness and rectitude of knowledge and will are the things
required until a greater Power than our mental selves directly intervenes to effect a more easy and rapid
transformation.
Page 739

\par
\hn Chapter XV
\par
\ht Soul-Force and the Fourfold\nl Personality
\par\drop The perfecting of the normal mind, heart, prana and body gives us only the perfection of the
psycho-physical machine we have to use and creates certain right instrumental conditions for a divine life and
works lived and done with a purer, greater, clearer power and knowledge. The next question is that of the Force
which is poured into the instruments, \s{kara\,na}, and the One who works it for his universal ends. The force at
work in us must be the manifest divine Shakti, the supreme or the universal Force unveiled in the liberated
individual being, \s{par\=a prak\,rtir j\=ivabh\=ut\=a}, who will be the doer of all the action and the power of this divine life,
\s{kart\=a}. The One behind this force will be the Ishwara, the Master of all being, with whom all our existence
will be in our perfection a Yoga at once of oneness in being and of union in various relations of the soul and its
nature with the Godhead who is seated within us and in whom too we live, move and have our being. It is this
Shakti with the Ishwara in her or behind her whose divine presence and way we have to call into all our being
and life. For without this divine presence and this greater working there can be no siddhi of the power of the
nature.
\par All the action of man in life is a nexus of the presence of the soul and the workings of Nature, Purusha and
Prakriti. The presence and influence of the Purusha represents itself in nature as a certain power of our being
which we may call for our immediate purpose soul-force; and it is always this soul-force which supports all the
workings of the powers of the reason, the mind, life and body and determines the cast of our conscious being and
the type of our nature. The normal ordinarily developed man possesses it in a subdued, a modified, a mechanised,
submerged
Page 740

form as temperament and character; but that is only its most outward mould in which Purusha, the conscious soul
or being, seems to be limited, conditioned and given some shape by the mechanical Prakriti. The soul flows into
whatever moulds of intellectual, ethical, aesthetic, dynamic, vital and physical mind and type the developing
nature takes and can act only in the way this formed Prakriti lays on it and move in its narrow groove or
relatively wider circle. The man is then sattwic, rajasic or tamasic or a mixture of these qualities and his
temperament is only a sort of subtler soul-colour which has been given to the major prominent operation of these
fixed modes of his nature. Men of a stronger force get more of the soul-power to the surface and develop what
we call a strong or great personality, they have in them something of the Vibhuti as described by the Gita,
\s{vibh\=utimat sattva\.m \'sr\=imad \=urjitam eva v\=a}, a higher power of being often touched with or sometimes full of
some divine afflatus or more than ordinary manifestation of the Godhead which is indeed present in all, even in
the weakest or most clouded living being, but here some special force of it begins to come out from behind the
veil of the average humanity, and there is something beautiful, attractive, splendid or powerful in these
exceptional persons which shines out in their personality, character, life and work. These men too work in the
type of their nature-force according to its gunas, but there is something evident in them and yet not easily
analysable which is in reality a direct power of the Self and spirit using to strong purpose the mould and direction
of the nature. The nature itself thereby rises to or towards a higher grade of its being. Much in the working of
the Force may seem egoistic or even perverse, but it is still the touch of the Godhead behind, whatever Daivic,
Asuric or even Rakshasic form it may take, which drives the Prakriti and uses it for its own greater purpose. A
still more developed power of the being will bring out the real character of this spiritual presence and it will then
be seen as something impersonal and self-existent and self-empowered, a sheer soul-force which is other than
the mind-force, life-force, force of intelligence, but drives them and, even while following to a certain extent their
Page 741

mould of working, guna, type of nature, yet puts its stamp of an initial transcendence, impersonality, pure fire of
spirit, a something beyond the gunas of our normal nature. When the spirit in us is free, then what was behind
this soul-force comes out in all its light, beauty and greatness, the Spirit, the Godhead who makes the nature and
soul of man his foundation and living representative in cosmic being and mind, action and life.
\par The Godhead, the spirit manifested in Nature appears in a sea of infinite quality, Ananta-guna. But the
executive or mechanical Prakriti is of the threefold guna, sattwa, rajas, tamas, and the Ananta-guna, the spiritual
play of infinite quality, modifies itself in this mechanical nature into the type of these three gunas. And in the
soul-force in man this Godhead in Nature represents itself as a fourfold effective Power, \sforced{catur-vy\=uha},
a Power for knowledge, a Power for strength, a Power for mutuality and active and productive relation and
interchange, a Power for works and labour and service, and its presence casts all human life into a nexus and
inner and outer operation of these four things. The ancient thought of India conscious of this fourfold type of
active human personality and nature built out of it the four types of the Brahmana, Kshatriya, Vaishya and
Shudra, each with its spiritual turn, ethical ideal, suitable upbringing, fixed function in society and place in the
evolutionary scale of the spirit. As always tends to be the case when we too much externalise and mechanise the
more subtle truths of our nature, this became a hard and fast system inconsistent with the freedom and variability
and complexity of the finer developing spirit in man. Nevertheless the truth behind it exists and is one of some
considerable importance in the perfection of our power of nature; but we have to take it in its inner aspects, first,
personality, character, temperament, soul-type, then the soul-force which lies behind them and wears these
forms, and lastly the play of the free spiritual Shakti in which they find their culmination and unity beyond all
modes. For the crude external idea that a man is born as a Brahmana, Kshatriya, Vaishya or Shudra and that
alone, is not a psychological truth of our being. The psychological fact is that there are these four active powers
Page 742

and tendencies of the Spirit and its executive Shakti within us and the predominance of one or the other in the
more well-formed part of our personality gives us our main tendencies, dominant qualities and capacities,
effective turn in action and life. But they are more or less present in all men, here manifest, there latent, here
developed, there subdued and depressed or subordinate, and in the perfect man will be raised up to a fullness and
harmony which in the spiritual freedom will burst out into the free play of the infinite quality of the spirit in the
inner and outer life and in the self-enjoying creative play of the Purusha with his and the world's Nature-Power.
\par The most outward psychological form of these things is the mould or trend of the nature towards certain
dominant tendencies, capacities, characteristics, form of active power, quality of the mind and inner life, cultural
personality or type. The turn is often towards the predominance of the intellectual element and the capacities
which make for the seeking and finding of knowledge and an intellectual creation or formativeness and a
preoccupation with ideas and the study of ideas or of life and the information and development of the reflective
intelligence. According to the grade of the development there is produced successively the make and character
of the man of active, open, inquiring intelligence, then the intellectual and, last, the thinker, sage, great mind of
knowledge. The soul-powers which make their appearance by a considerable development of this temperament,
personality, soul-type, are a mind of light more and more open to all ideas and knowledge and incomings of Truth;
a hunger and passion for knowledge, for its growth in ourselves, for its communication to others, for its reign in
the world, the reign of reason and right and truth and justice and, on a higher level of the harmony of our greater
being, the reign of the spirit and its universal unity and light and love; a power of this light in the mind and will
which makes all the life subject to reason and its right and truth or to the spirit and spiritual right and truth and
subdues the lower members to their greater law; a poise in the temperament turned from the first to patience,
steady musing and calm, to reflection, to meditation, which dominates
Page 743

and quiets the turmoil of the will and passions and makes for high thinking and pure living, founds the
self-governed sattwic mind, grows into a more and more mild, lofty, impersonalised and universalised personality.
This is the ideal character and soul-power of the Brahmana, the priest of knowledge. If it is not there in all its
sides, we have the imperfections or perversions of the type, a mere intellectuality or curiosity for ideas without
ethical or other elevation, a narrow concentration on some kind of intellectual activity without the greater needed
openness of mind, soul and spirit, or the arrogance and exclusiveness of the intellectual shut up in his
intellectuality, or an ineffective idealism without any hold on life, or any other of the characteristic
incompletenesses and limitations of the intellectual, religious, scientific or philosophic mind. These are stoppings
short on the way or temporary exclusive concentrations, but a fullness of the divine soul and power of truth and
knowledge in man is the perfection of this Dharma or Swabhava, the accomplished Brahminhood of the complete
Brahmana.
\par On the other hand the turn of the nature may be to the predominance of the will-force and the capacities
which make for strength, energy, courage, leadership, protection, rule, victory in every kind of battle, a creative
and formative action, the will-power which lays its hold on the material of life and on the wills of other men and
compels the environment into the shapes which the Shakti within us seeks to impose on life or acts powerfully
according to the work to be done to maintain what is in being or to destroy it and make clear the paths of the
world or to bring out into definite shape what is to be. This may be there in lesser or greater power or form and
according to its grade and force we have successively the mere fighter or man of action, the man of
self-imposing active will and personality and the ruler, conqueror, leader of a cause, creator, founder in whatever
field of the active formation of life. The various imperfections of the soul and mind produce many imperfections
and perversities of this type,—the man of mere brute force of will, the worshipper of power without any other
ideal or higher purpose, the selfish, dominant personality, the aggressive violent rajasic man,
Page 744

the grandiose egoist, the Titan, Asura, Rakshasa. But the soul-powers to which this type of nature opens on its
higher grades are as necessary as those of the Brahmana to the perfection of our human nature. The high
fearlessness which no danger or difficulty can daunt and which feels its power equal to meet and face and bear
whatever assault of man or fortune or adverse gods, the dynamic audacity and daring which shrinks from no
adventure or enterprise as beyond the powers of a human soul free from disabling weakness and fear, the love
of honour which would scale the heights of the highest nobility of man and stoop to nothing little, base, vulgar or
weak, but maintains untainted the ideal of high courage, chivalry, truth, straightforwardness, sacrifice of the
lower to the higher self, helpfulness to men, unflinching resistance to injustice and oppression, self-control and
mastery, noble leading, warriorhood and captainship of the journey and the battle, the high self-confidence of
power, capacity, character and courage indispensable to the man of action,—these are the things that build the
make of the Kshatriya. To carry these things to their highest degree and give them a certain divine fullness,
purity and grandeur is the perfection of those who have this Swabhava and follow this Dharma.
\par A third turn is one that brings out into relief the practical arranging intelligence and the instinct of life to
produce, exchange, possess, enjoy, contrive, put things in order and balance, spend itself and get and give and
take, work out to the best advantage the active relations of existence. In its outward action it is this power that
appears as the skilful devising intelligence, the legal, professional, commercial, industrial, economical, practical
and scientific, mechanical, technical and utilitarian mind. This nature is accompanied at the normal level of its
fullness by a general temperament which is at once grasping and generous, prone to amass and treasure, to
enjoy, show and use, bent upon efficient exploitation of the world or its surroundings, but well capable too of
practical philanthropy, humanity, ordered benevolence, orderly and ethical by rule but without any high distinction
of the finer ethical spirit, a mind of the middle levels, not straining towards the heights, not great to break and
create noble moulds
Page 745

of life, but marked by capacity, adaptation and measure. The powers, limitations and perversions of this type are
familiar to us on a large scale, because this is the very spirit which has made our modern commercial and
industrial civilisation. But if we look at the greater inner capacities and soul-values, we shall find that here also
there are things that enter into the completeness of human perfection. The Power that thus outwardly expresses
itself on our present lower levels is one that can throw itself out in the great utilities of life and at its freest and
widest makes, not for oneness and identity which is the highest reach of knowledge or the mastery and spiritual
kingship which is the highest reach of strength, but still for something which is also essential to the wholeness of
existence, equal mutuality and the exchange of soul with soul and life with life. Its powers are, first, a skill,
\s{kau\'sala}, which fashions and obeys law, recognises the uses and limits of relations, adapts itself to settled and
developing movements, produces and perfects the outer technique of creation and action and life, assures
possession and proceeds from possession to growth, is watchful over order and careful in progress and makes
the most of the material of existence and its means and ends; then a power of self-spending skilful in lavishness
and skilful in economy, which recognises the great law of interchange and amasses in order to throw out in a
large return, increasing the currents of interchange and the fruitfulness of existence; a power of giving and ample
creative liberality, mutual helpfulness and utility to others which becomes the source in an open soul of just
beneficence, humanitarianism, altruism of a practical kind; finally, a power of enjoyment, a productive,
possessive, active opulence luxurious of the prolific Ananda of existence. A largeness of mutuality, a generous
fullness of the relations of life, a lavish self-spending and return and ample interchange between existence and
existence, a full enjoyment and use of the rhythm and balance of fruitful and productive life are the perfection of
those who have this Swabhava and follow this Dharma.
\par The other turn is towards work and service. This was in the old order the dharma or soul-type of the Shudra
and the Shudra in that order was considered as not one of the twice-born, but
Page 746

an inferior type. A more recent consideration of the values of existence lays stress on the dignity of labour and
sees in its toil the bed-rock of the relations between man and man. There is a truth in both attitudes. For this
force in the material world is at once in its necessity the foundation of material existence or rather that on which
it moves, the feet of the creator Brahma in the old parable, and in its primal state not uplifted by knowledge,
mutuality or strength a thing which reposes on instinct, desire and inertia. The well-developed Shudra soul-type
has the instinct of toil and the capacity of labour and service; but toil as opposed to easy or natural action is a
thing imposed on the natural man which he bears because without it he cannot assure his existence or get his
desires and he has to force himself or be forced by others or circumstances to spend himself in work. The
natural Shudra works not from a sense of the dignity of labour or from the enthusiasm of service,—though that
comes by the cultivation of his dharma,—not as the man of knowledge for the joy or gain of knowledge, not from
a sense of honour, nor as the born craftsman or artist for love of his work or ardour for the beauty of its
technique, nor from an ordered sense of mutuality or large utility, but for the maintenance of his existence and
gratification of his primal wants, and when these are satisfied, he indulges, if left to himself, his natural indolence,
the indolence which is normal to the tamasic quality in all of us, but comes out most clearly in the uncompelled
primitive man, the savage. The unregenerated Shudra is born therefore for service rather than for free labour
and his temperament is prone to an inert ignorance, a gross unthinking self-indulgence of the instincts, a servility,
an unreflective obedience and mechanical discharge of duty varied by indolence, evasion, spasmodic revolt, an
instinctive and uninformed life. The ancients held that all men are born in their lower nature as Shudras and only
regenerated by ethical and spiritual culture, but in their highest inner self are Brahmanas capable of the full spirit
and godhead, a theory which is not far perhaps from the psychological truth of our nature.
\par And yet when the soul develops, it is in this Swabhava and
Page 747

Dharma of work and service that there are found some of the most necessary and beautiful elements of our
greatest perfection and the key to much of the secret of the highest spiritual evolution. For the soul powers that
belong to the full development of this force in us are of the greatest importance,—the power of service to others,
the will to make our life a thing of work and use to God and man, to obey and follow and accept whatever great
influence and needful discipline, the love which consecrates service, a love which asks for no return, but spends
itself for the satisfaction of that which we love, the power to bring down this love and service into the physical
field and the desire to give our body and life as well as our soul and mind and will and capacity to God and man,
and, as a result, the power of complete self-surrender, \s{\=atma-samarpa\,na}, which transferred to the spiritual life
becomes one of the greatest most revealing keys to freedom and perfection. In these things lies the perfection of
this Dharma and the nobility of this Swabhava. Man could not be perfect and complete if he had not this element
of nature in him to raise to its divine power.
\par None of these four types of personality can be complete even in its own field if it does not bring into it
something of the other qualities. The man of knowledge cannot serve Truth with freedom and perfection, if he
has not intellectual and moral courage, will, audacity, the strength to open and conquer new kingdoms, otherwise
he becomes a slave of the limited intellect or a servant or at most a ritual priest of only an established
knowledge,
\note{That perhaps is why it was the Kshatriya bringing his courage, audacity, spirit of conquest into the fields of
intuitive knowledge and spiritual experience who first discovered the great truths of Vedanta.}—cannot use his
knowledge to the best advantage unless he has the adaptive skill to work out its truths for the practice of life,
otherwise he lives only in the idea,—cannot make the entire consecration of his knowledge unless he has the
spirit of service to humanity, to the Godhead in man and the Master of his being. The man of power must illumine
and uplift and govern his force and strength by knowledge, light of reason or religion or the spirit, otherwise he
becomes the mere forceful
Page 748

Asura,—must have the skill which will help him best to use and administer and regulate his strength and make it
creative and fruitful and adapted to his relations with others, otherwise it becomes a mere drive of force across
the field of life, a storm that passes and devastates more than it constructs,—must be capable too of obedience
and make the use of his strength a service to God and the world, otherwise he becomes a selfish dominator,
tyrant, brutal compeller of men's souls and bodies. The man of productive mind and work must have an open
inquiring mind and ideas and knowledge, otherwise he moves in the routine of his functions without expansive
growth, must have courage and enterprise, must bring a spirit of service into his getting and production, in order
that he may not only get but give, not only amass and enjoy his own life, but consciously help the fruitfulness and
fullness of the surrounding life by which he profits. The man of labour and service becomes a helpless drudge
and slave of society if he does not bring knowledge and honour and aspiration and skill into his work, since only
so can he rise by an opening mind and will and understanding usefulness to the higher dharmas. But the greater
perfection of man comes when he enlarges himself to include all these powers, even though one of them may
lead the others, and opens his nature more and more into the rounded fullness and universal capacity of the
fourfold spirit. Man is not cut out into an exclusive type of one of these dharmas, but all these powers are in him
at work at first in an ill-formed confusion, but he gives shape to one or another in birth after birth, progresses
from one to the other even in the same life and goes on towards the total development of his inner existence. Our
life itself is at once an inquiry after truth and knowledge, a struggle and battle of our will with ourselves and
surrounding forces, a constant production, adaptation, application of skill to the material of life and a sacrifice and
service.
\par These things are the ordinary aspects of the soul while it is working out its force in nature, but when we get
nearer to our inner selves, then we get too a glimpse and experience of something which was involved in these
forms and can disengage itself and stand behind and drive them, as if a general Presence
Page 749

or Power brought to bear on the particular working of this living and thinking machine. This is the force of the
soul itself presiding over and filling the powers of its nature. The difference is that the first way is personal in its
stamp, limited and determined in its action and mould, dependent on the instrumentation, but here there emerges
something impersonal in the personal form, independent and self-sufficient even in the use of the instrumentation,
indeterminable though determining both itself and things, something which acts with a much greater power upon
the world and uses particular power only as one means of communication and impact on man and circumstance.
The Yoga of self-perfection brings out this soul-force and gives it its largest scope, takes up all the fourfold
powers and throws them into the free circle of an integral and harmonious spiritual dynamis. The godhead, the
soul-power of knowledge rises to the highest degree of which the individual nature can be the supporting basis. A
free mind of light develops which is open to every kind of revelation, inspiration, intuition, idea, discrimination,
thinking synthesis; an enlightened life of the mind grasps at all knowledge with a delight of finding and reception
and holding, a spiritual enthusiasm, passion, or ecstasy; a power of light full of spiritual force, illumination and
purity of working manifests its empire, \s{brahma-tejas}, \s{brahma-varcas}; a bottomless steadiness and
illimitable calm upholds all the illumination, movement, action as on some rock of ages, equal, unperturbed,
unmoved, \s{acyuta}.
\par The godhead, the soul-power of will and strength rises to a like largeness and altitude. An absolute calm
fearlessness of the free spirit, an infinite dynamic courage which no peril, limitation of possibility, wall of opposing
force can deter from pursuing the work or aspiration imposed by the spirit, a high nobility of soul and will
untouched by any littleness or baseness and moving with a certain greatness of step to spiritual victory or the
success of the God-given work through whatever temporary defeat or obstacle, a spirit never depressed or cast
down from faith and confidence in the power that works in the being, are the signs of this perfection. There
comes too to fulfilment a large godhead,
Page 750

a soul-power of mutuality, a free self-spending and spending of gift and possession in the work to be done,
lavished for the production, the creation, the achievement, the possession, gain, utilisable return, a skill that
observes the law and adapts the relation and keeps the measure, a great taking into oneself from all beings and a
free giving out of oneself to all, a divine commerce, a large enjoyment of the mutual delight of life. And finally
there comes to perfection the godhead, the soul-power of service, the universal love that lavishes itself without
demand of return, the embrace that takes to itself the body of God in man and works for help and service, the
abnegation that is ready to bear the yoke of the Master and make the life a free servitude to Him and under his
direction to the claim and need of his creatures, the self-surrender of the whole being to the Master of our being
and his work in the world. These things unite, assist and enter into each other, become one. The full
consummation comes in the greatest souls most capable of perfection, but some large manifestation of this
fourfold soul-power must be sought and can be attained by all who practise the integral Yoga.
\par These are the signs, but behind is the soul which thus expresses itself in a consummation of nature. And this
soul is an outcoming of the free self of the liberated man. That self is of no character, being infinite, but bears
and upholds the play of all character, supports a kind of infinite, one, yet multiple personality, \s{nirgu\,no gu\,n\=i}, is
in its manifestation capable of infinite quality, \s{anantagu\,na}. The force that it uses is the supreme and
universal, the divine and infinite Shakti pouring herself into the individual being and freely determining action for
the divine purpose.
Page 751

\par
\hn Chapter XVI
\par
\ht The Divine Shakti
\par\drop The relation between the Purusha and Prakriti which emerges as one advances in the Yoga of
self-perfection is the next thing that we have to understand carefully in this part of the Yoga. In the spiritual truth
of our being the power which we call Nature is the power of being, consciousness and will and therefore the
power of self-expression and self-creation of the self, soul or Purusha. But to our ordinary mind in the ignorance
and to its experience of things the force of Prakriti has a different appearance. When we look at it in its universal
action outside ourselves, we see it first as a mechanical energy in the cosmos which acts upon matter or in its
own created forms of matter. In matter it evolves powers and processes of life and in living matter powers and
processes of mind. Throughout its operations it acts by fixed laws and in each kind of created thing displays
varying properties of energy and laws of process which give its character to the genus or species and again in
the individual develops without infringing the law of the kind minor characteristics and variations of a
considerable consequence. It is this mechanical appearance of Prakriti which has preoccupied the modern
scientific mind and made for it its whole view of Nature, and so much so that science still hopes and labours with
a very small amount of success to explain all phenomena of life by laws of matter and all phenomena of mind by
laws of living matter. Here soul or spirit has no place and nature cannot be regarded as power of spirit. Since the
whole of our existence is mechanical, physical and bounded by the biological phenomenon of a brief living
consciousness and man is a creature and instrument of material energy, the spiritual self-evolution of Yoga can
be only a delusion, hallucination, abnormal state of mind or self-hypnosis. In any case it cannot be what it
represents itself to be, a discovery of the eternal truth
Page 752

of our being and a passing above the limited truth of the mental, vital and physical to the full truth of our spiritual
nature.
\par But when we look, not at external mechanical Nature to the exclusion of our personality, but at the inner
subjective experience of man the mental being, our nature takes to us a quite different appearance. We may
believe intellectually in a purely mechanical view even of our subjective existence, but we cannot act upon it or
make it quite real to our self-experience. For we are conscious of an I which does not seem identical with our
nature, but capable of a standing back from it, of a detached observation and criticism and creative use of it, and
of a will which we naturally think of as a free will; and even if this be a delusion, we are still obliged in practice
to act as if we were responsible mental beings capable of a free choice of our actions, able to use or misuse and
to turn to higher or lower ends our nature. And even we seem to be struggling both with our environmental and
with our own present nature and striving to get mastery over a world which imposes itself on and masters us and
at the same time to become something more than we now are. But the difficulty is that we are only in command,
if at all, over a small part of ourselves, the rest is subconscient or subliminal and beyond our control, our will acts
only in a small selection of our activities; the most is a process of mechanism and habit and we must strive
constantly with ourselves and surrounding circumstances to make the least advance or self-amelioration. There
seems to be a dual being in us; Soul and Nature, Purusha and Prakriti, seem to be half in agreement, half at odds,
Nature laying its mechanical control on the soul, the soul attempting to change and master nature. And the
question is what is the fundamental character of this duality and what the issue.
\par The Sankhya explanation is that our present existence is governed by a dual principle. Prakriti is inert
without the contact of Purusha, acts only by a junction with it and then too by the fixed mechanism of her
instruments and qualities; Purusha, passive and free apart from Prakriti, becomes by contact with her and
sanction to her works subject to this mechanism, lives
Page 753

in her limitation of ego-sense and must get free by withdrawing the sanction and returning to its own proper
principle. Another explanation that tallies with a certain part of our experience is that there is a dual being in us,
the animal and material, or more widely the lower nature-bound, and the soul or spiritual being entangled by mind
in the material existence or in world-nature, and freedom comes by escape from the entanglement, the soul
returning to its native planes or the self or spirit to its pure existence. The perfection of the soul then is to be
found not at all in, but beyond Nature.
\par But in a higher than our present mental consciousness we find that this duality is only a phenomenal
appearance. The highest and real truth of existence is the one Spirit, the supreme Soul, Purushottama, and it is
the power of being of this Spirit which manifests itself in all that we experience as universe. This universal
Nature is not a lifeless, inert or unconscious mechanism, but informed in all its movements by the universal Spirit.
The mechanism of its process is only an outward appearance and the reality is the Spirit creating or manifesting
its own being by its own power of being in all that is in Nature. Soul and Nature in us too are only a dual
appearance of the one existence. The universal energy acts in us, but the soul limits itself by the ego-sense, lives
in a partial and separate experience of her workings, uses only a modicum and a fixed action of her energy for its
self-expression. It seems rather to be mastered and used by this energy than to use it, because it identifies itself
with the ego-sense which is part of the natural instrumentation and lives in the ego experience. The ego is in fact
driven by the mechanism of Nature of which it is a part and the ego-will is not and cannot be a free will. To
arrive at freedom, mastery and perfection we have to get back to the real self and soul within and arrive too
thereby at our true relations with our own and with universal nature.
\par In our active being this translates itself into a replacement of our egoistic, our personal, our separatively
individual will and energy by a universal and a divine will and energy which determines our action in harmony
with the universal action and
Page 754

reveals itself as the direct will and the all-guiding power of the Purushottama. We replace the inferior action of
the limited, ignorant and imperfect personal will and energy in us by the action of the divine Shakti. To open
ourselves to the universal energy is always possible to us, because that is all around us and always flowing into
us, it is that which supports and supplies all our inner and outer action and in fact we have no power of our own
in any separately individual sense, but only a personal formulation of the one Shakti. And on the other hand this
universal Shakti is within ourselves, concentrated in us, for the whole power of it is present in each individual as
in the universe, and there are means and processes by which we can awaken its greater and potentially infinite
force and liberate it to its larger workings.
\par We can become aware of the existence and presence of the universal Shakti in the various forms of her
power. At present we are conscious only of the power as formulated in our physical mind, nervous being and
corporeal case sustaining our various activities. But if we can once get beyond this first formation by some
liberation of the hidden, recondite, subliminal parts of our existence by Yoga, we become aware of a greater life
force, a pranic Shakti, which supports and fills the body and supplies all the physical and vital activities,—for the
physical energy is only a modified form of this force,—and supplies and sustains too from below all our mental
action. This force we feel in ourselves also, but we can feel it too around us and above, one with the same
energy in us, and can draw it in and down to aggrandise our normal action or call upon and get it to pour into us.
It is an illimitable ocean of Shakti and will pour as much of itself as we can hold into our being. This pranic force
we can use for any of the activities of life, body or mind with a far greater and effective power than any that we
command in our present operations, limited as they are by the physical formula. The use of this pranic power
liberates us from that limitation to the extent of our ability to use it in place of the body-bound energy. It can be
used so to direct the prana as to manage more powerfully or to rectify any bodily
Page 755

state or action, as to heal illness or to get rid of fatigue, and to liberate an enormous amount of mental exertion
and play of will or knowledge. The exercises of Pranayama are the familiar mechanical means of freeing and
getting control of the pranic energy. They heighten too and set free the psychic, mental and spiritual energies
which ordinarily depend for their opportunity of action on the pranic force. But the same thing can be done by
mental will and practice or by an increasing opening of ourselves to a higher spiritual power of the Shakti. The
pranic Shakti can be directed not only upon ourselves, but effectively towards others or on things or happenings
for whatever purposes the will dictates. Its effectivity is immense, in itself illimitable, and limited only by defect of
the power, purity and universality of the spiritual or other will which is brought to bear upon it; but still, however
great and powerful, it is a lower formulation, a link between the mind and body, an instrumental force. There is a
consciousness in it, a presence of the spirit, of which we are aware, but it is encased, involved in and
preoccupied with the urge to action. It is not to this action of the Shakti that we can leave the whole burden of
our activities; we have either to use its lendings by our own enlightened personal will or else call in a higher
guidance; for of itself it will act with greater force, but still according to our imperfect nature and mainly by the
drive and direction of the life-power in us and not according to the law of the highest spiritual existence.
\par The ordinary power by which we govern the pranic energy is that of the embodied mind. But when we get
clear above the physical mind, we can get too above the pranic force to the consciousness of a pure mental
energy which is a higher formulation of the Shakti. There we are aware of a universal mind consciousness
closely associated with this energy in, around and above us,—above, that is to say, the level of our ordinary mind
status,—giving all the substance and shaping all the forms of our will and knowledge and of the psychic element
in our impulses and emotions. This mind force can be made to act upon the pranic energy and can impose upon it
the influence, colour, shape, character, direction of our ideas, our knowledge,
Page 756

our more enlightened volition and thus more effectively bring our life and vital being into harmony with our higher
powers of being, ideals and spiritual aspirations. In our ordinary state these two, the mental and the pranic being
and energies, are very much mixed up and run into each other, and we are not able clearly to distinguish them or
get a full hold of the one on the other and so control effectively the lower by the higher and more understanding
principle. But when we take our station above the physical mind, we are able then to separate clearly the two
forms of energy, the two levels of our being, disentangle their action and act with a clearer and more potent
self-knowledge and an enlightened and a purer will-power. Nevertheless the control is not complete,
spontaneous, sovereign so long as we work with the mind as our chief guiding and controlling force. The mental
energy we find to be itself derivative, a lower and limiting power of the conscious spirit which acts only by
isolated and combined seeings, imperfect and incomplete half-lights which we take for full and adequate light,
and with a disparity between the idea and knowledge and the effective will-power. And we are aware soon of a
far higher power of the Spirit and its Shakti concealed or above, superconscient to mind or partially acting
through the mind, of which all this is an inferior derivation.
\par The Purusha and Prakriti are on the mental level as in the rest of our being closely joined and much involved
in each other and we are not able to distinguish clearly soul and nature. But in the purer substance of mind we
can more easily discern the dual strain. The mental Purusha is naturally able in its own native principle of mind to
detach itself, as we have seen, from the workings of its Prakriti and there is then a division of our being between
a consciousness that observes and can reserve its will-power and an energy full of the substance of
consciousness that takes the forms of knowledge, will and feeling. This detachment gives at its highest a certain
freedom from the compulsion of the soul by its mental nature. For ordinarily we are driven and carried along in
the stream of our own and the universal active energy partly floundering in its waves, partly maintaining and
seeming to guide or at least propel ourselves by a collected
Page 757

thought and an effort of the mental will muscle; but now there is a part of ourselves, nearest to the pure essence
of self, which is free from the stream, can quietly observe and to a certain extent decide its immediate movement
and course and to a greater extent its ultimate direction. The Purusha can at last act upon the Prakriti from half
apart, from behind or from above her as a presiding person or presence, \s{adhyak\,sa}, by the power of sanction
and control inherent in the spirit.
\par What we shall do with this relative freedom depends on our aspiration, our idea of the relation we must have
with our highest self, with God and Nature. It is possible for the Purusha to use it on the mental plane itself for a
constant self-observation, self-development, self-modification, to sanction, reject, alter, bring out new
formulations of the nature and establish a calm and disinterested action, a high and pure sattwic balance and
rhythm of its energy, a personality perfected in the sattwic principle. This may amount only to a highly mentalised
perfection of our present intelligence and the ethical and the psychic being or else, aware of the greater self in
us, it may impersonalise, universalise, spiritualise its self-conscious existence and the action of its nature and
arrive either at a large quietude or a large perfection of the spiritualised mental energy of its being. It is possible
again for the Purusha to stand back entirely and by a refusal of sanction allow the whole normal action of the
mind to exhaust itself, run down, spend its remaining impetus of habitual action and fall into silence. Or else this
silence may be imposed on the mental energy by rejection of its action and a constant command to quietude. The
soul may through the confirmation of this quietude and mental silence pass into some ineffable tranquillity of the
spirit and vast cessation of the activities of Nature. But it is also possible to make this silence of the mind and
ability to suspend the habits of the lower nature a first step towards the discovery of a superior formulation, a
higher grade of the status and energy of our being and pass by an ascent and transformation into the supramental
power of the spirit. And this may even, though with more difficulty, be done without resorting to the complete
state of quietude of the normal mind
Page 758

by a persistent and progressive transformation of all the mental into their greater corresponding supramental
powers and activities. For everything in the mind derives from and is a limited, inferior, groping, partial or
perverse translation into mentality of something in the supermind. But neither of these movements can be
successfully executed by the sole individual unaided power of the mental Purusha in us, but needs the help,
intervention and guidance of the divine Self, the Ishwara, the Purushottama. For the supermind is the divine mind
and it is on the supramental plane that the individual arrives at his right, integral, luminous and perfect relation
with the supreme and universal Purusha and the supreme and universal Para Prakriti.
\par As the mind progresses in purity, capacity of stillness or freedom from absorption in its own limited action, it
becomes aware of and is able to reflect, bring into itself or enter into the conscious presence of the Self, the
supreme and universal Spirit, and it becomes aware too of grades and powers of the spirit higher than its own
highest ranges. It becomes aware of an infinite of the consciousness of being, an infinite ocean of all the power
and energy of illimitable consciousness, an infinite ocean of Ananda, of the self-moved delight of existence. It
may be aware of one or other only of these things, for the mind can separate and feel exclusively as distinct
original principles what in a higher experience are inseparable powers of the One, or it may feel them in a trinity
or fusion which reveals or arrives at their oneness. It may become aware of it on the side of Purusha or on the
side of Prakriti. On the side of Purusha it reveals itself as Self or Spirit, as Being or as the one sole existent
Being, the divine Purushottama, and the individual Jiva soul can enter into entire oneness with it in its timeless
self or in its universality, or enjoy nearness, immanence, difference without any gulf of separation and enjoy too
inseparably and at one and the same time oneness of being and delight-giving difference of relation in active
experiencing nature. On the side of Prakriti the power and Ananda of the Spirit come into the front to manifest
this Infinite in the beings and personalities and ideas and forms and forces of the universe and there is then
present to us the divine
Page 759

Mahashakti, original Power, supreme Nature, holding in herself infinite existence and creating the wonders of the
cosmos. The mind grows conscious of this illimitable ocean of Shakti or else of her presence high above the mind
and pouring something of herself into us to constitute all that we are and think and will and do and feel and
experience, or it is conscious of her all around us and our personality a wave of the ocean of power of spirit, or
of her presence in us and of her action there based on our present form of natural existence but originated from
above and raising us towards the higher spiritual status. The mind too can rise towards and touch her infinity or
merge itself in it in trance of samadhi or can lose itself in her universality, and then our individuality disappears,
our centre of action is then no longer in us, but either outside our bodied selves or nowhere; our mental activities
are then no longer our own, but come into this frame of mind, life and body from the universal, work themselves
out and pass leaving no impression on us, and this frame of ourselves too is only an insignificant circumstance in
her cosmic vastness. But the perfection sought in the integral Yoga is not only to be one with her in her highest
spiritual power and one with her in her universal action, but to realise and possess the fullness of this Shakti in
our individual being and nature. For the supreme Spirit is one as Purusha or as Prakriti, conscious being or power
of conscious being, and as the Jiva in essence of self and spirit is one with the supreme Purusha, so on the side
of Nature, in power of self and spirit it is one with Shakti, \s{par\=a prak\,rtir j\=ivabh\=ut\=a}. To realise this double
oneness is the condition of the integral self-perfection. The Jiva is then the meeting-place of the play of oneness
of the supreme Soul and Nature.
\par To reach this perfection we have to become aware of the divine Shakti, draw her to us and call her in to fill
the whole system and take up the charge of all our activities. There will then be no separate personal will or
individual energy trying to conduct our actions, no sense of a little personal self as the doer, nor will it be the
lower energy of the three gunas, the mental, vital and physical nature. The divine Shakti will fill
Page 760

us and preside over and take up all our inner activities, our outer life, our Yoga. She will take up the mental
energy, her own lower formation, and raise it to its highest and purest and fullest powers of intelligence and will
and psychic action. She will change the mechanical energies of the mind, life and body which now govern us into
delight-filled manifestations of her own living and conscious power and presence. She will manifest in us and
relate to each other all the various spiritual experiences of which the mind is capable. And as the crown of this
process she will bring down the supramental light into the mental levels, change the stuff of mind into the stuff of
supermind, transform all the lower energies into energies of her supramental nature and raise us into our being of
gnosis. The Shakti will reveal herself as the power of the Purushottama, and it is the Ishwara who will manifest
himself in his force of supermind and spirit and be the master of our being, action, life and Yoga.
Page 761

\par
\hn Chapter XVII
\par
\ht The Action of the Divine Shakti
\par\drop This is the nature of the divine Shakti that it is the timeless power of the Divine which manifests itself
in time as a universal force creating, constituting, maintaining and directing all the movements and workings of
the universe. This universal Power is apparent to us first on the lower levels of existence as a mental, vital and
material cosmic energy of which all our mental, vital and physical activities are the operations. It is necessary for
our sadhana that we should thoroughly realise this truth in order to escape from the pressure of the limiting ego
view and universalise ourselves even on these lower levels where ordinarily the ego reigns in full force. To see
that we are not the originators of action but that it is rather this Power that acts in ourselves and in all others, not
I and others the doers, but the one Prakriti, which is the rule of the Karmayoga, is also the right rule here. The
ego sense serves to limit, separate and sharply differentiate, to make the most of the individual form and it is
there because it is indispensable to the evolution of the lower life. But when we would rise above to a higher
divine life we must loosen the force of the ego and eventually get rid of it—as for the lower life the development
of ego, so for the higher life this reverse movement of elimination of the ego is indispensable. To see our actions
as not our own but those of the divine Shakti working in the form of the lower Prakriti on the inferior levels of the
conscious being, helps powerfully towards this change. And if we can do this, then the separation of our mental,
vital and physical consciousness from that of other beings thins and lessens; the limitations of its workings remain
indeed, but they are broadened and taken up into a large sense and vision of the universal working; the
specialising and individualising differentiations of Nature abide for their own proper purpose, but are no longer a
prison. The individual feels
Page 762

his mind, life and physical existence to be one with that of others amid all differences and one with the total
power of the spirit in Nature.
\par This however is a stage and not the whole perfection. The existence, however comparatively large and free,
is still subject to the inferior nature. The sattwic, rajasic and tamasic ego is diminished but not eliminated; or if it
seems to disappear, it has only sunk in our parts of action into the universal operation of the gunas, remains
involved in them and is still working in a covert, subconscient fashion and may force itself to the front at any
time. The sadhaka has therefore first to keep the idea and get the realisation of a one self or spirit in all behind all
these workings. He must be aware behind Prakriti of the one supreme and universal Purusha. He must see and
feel not only that all is the self-shaping of the one Force, Prakriti or Nature, but that all her actions are those of
the Divine in all, the one Godhead in all, however veiled, altered and as it were perverted—for perversion comes
by a conversion into lower forms—by transmission through the ego and the gunas. This will farther diminish the
open or covert insistence of the ego and, if thoroughly realised, it will make it difficult or impossible for it to assert
itself in such a way as to disturb or hamper the farther progress. The ego-sense will become, so far as it
interferes at all, a foreign intrusive element and only a fringe of the mist of the old ignorance hanging on to the
outskirts of the consciousness and its action. And, secondly, the universal Shakti must be realised, must be seen
and felt and borne in the potent purity of its higher action, its supramental and spiritual workings. This greater
vision of the Shakti will enable us to escape from the control of the gunas, to convert them into their divine
equivalents and dwell in a consciousness in which the Purusha and Prakriti are one and not separated or hidden
in or behind each other. There the Shakti will be in its every movement evident to us and naturally,
spontaneously, irresistibly felt as nothing else but the active presence of the Divine, the shape of power of the
supreme Self and Spirit.
\par The Shakti in this higher status reveals itself as the presence
Page 763

or potentiality of the infinite existence, consciousness, will, delight, and when it is so seen and felt, the being turns
towards it in whatever way, with its adoration or its will of aspiration or some kind of attraction of the lesser to
the greater, to know it, to be full of and possessed by it, to be one with it in the sense and action of the whole
nature. But at first while we still live in the mind, there is a gulf of division or else a double action. The mental,
vital and physical energy in us and the universe is felt to be a derivation from the supreme Shakti, but at the same
time an inferior, separated and in some sense another working. The real spiritual force may send down its
messages or the light and power of its presence above us to the lower levels or may descend occasionally and
even for a time possess, but it is then mixed with the inferior workings and partially transforms and spiritualises
them, but is itself diminished and altered in the process. There is an intermittent higher action or a dual working
of the nature. Or we find that the Shakti for a time raises the being to a higher spiritual plane and then lowers it
back into the inferior levels. These alternations must be regarded as the natural vicissitudes of a process of
transformation from the normal to the spiritual being. The transformation, the perfection cannot for the integral
Yoga be complete until the link between the mental and the spiritual action is formed and a higher knowledge
applied to all the activities of our existence. That link is the supramental or gnostic energy in which the
incalculable infinite power of the supreme being, consciousness, delight formulates itself as an ordering divine will
and wisdom, a light and power in the being which shapes all the thought, will, feeling, action and replaces the
corresponding individual movements.
\par This supramental Shakti may form itself as a spiritualised intuitive light and power in the mind itself, and that
is a great but still a mentally limited spiritual action. Or it may transform altogether the mind and raise the whole
being to the supramental level. In any case this is the first necessity of this part of the Yoga, to lose the ego of
the doer, the ego idea and the sense of one's own power of action and initiation of action and control of the result
of action and merge it in the sense and vision of
Page 764

the universal Shakti originating, shaping, turning to its ends the action of ourselves and others and of all the
persons and forces of the world. And this realisation can become absolute and complete in all the parts of our
being only if we can have that sense and vision of it in all its forms, on all the levels of our being and the world
being, as the material, vital, mental and supramental energy of the Divine, but all these, all the powers of all the
planes must be seen and known as self-formulations of the one spiritual Shakti, infinite in being, consciousness
and Ananda. It is not the invariable rule that this power should first manifest itself on the lower levels in the
lower forms of energy and then reveal its higher spiritual nature. And if it does so come, first in its mental, vital
or physical universalism, we must be careful not to rest content there. It may come instead at once in its higher
reality, in the might of the spiritual splendour. The difficulty then will be to bear and hold the Power until it has
laid powerful hands on and transformed the energies of the lower levels of the being. The difficulty will be less in
proportion as we have been able to attain to a large quiet and equality, \s{samat\=a}, and either to realise, feel and
live in the one tranquil immutable self in all or else to make a genuine and complete surrender of ourselves to the
divine Master of the Yoga.
\par It is necessary here to keep always in mind the three powers of the Divine which are present and have to be
taken account of in all living existences. In our ordinary consciousness we see these three as ourselves, the Jiva
in the form of the ego, God—whatever conception we may have of God, and Nature. In the spiritual experience
we see God as the supreme Self or Spirit, or as the Being from whom we come and in whom we live and move.
We see Nature as his Power or God as Power, Spirit in Power acting in ourselves and the world. The Jiva is
then himself this Self, Spirit, Divine, \sforced{so 'ham}, because he is one with him in essence of his being and
consciousness, but as the individual he is only a portion of the Divine, a self of the Spirit, and in his natural being a
form of the Shakti, a power of God in movement and action, \s{par\=a prak\,rtir j\=ivabh\=ut\=a}. At first, when we
become conscious of God or of the Shakti, the difficulties of our relation
Page 765

with them arise from the ego consciousness which we bring into the spiritual relation. The ego in us makes
claims on the Divine other than the spiritual claim, and these claims are in a sense legitimate, but so long as and
in proportion as they take the egoistic form, they are open to much grossness and great perversions, burdened
with an element of falsehood, undesirable reaction and consequent evil, and the relation can only be wholly right,
happy and perfect when these claims become part of the spiritual claim and lose their egoistic character. And in
fact the claim of our being upon the Divine is fulfilled absolutely only then when it ceases at all to be a claim and
is instead a fulfilment of the Divine through the individual, when we are satisfied with that alone, when we are
content with the delight of oneness in being, content to leave the supreme Self and Master of existence to do
whatever is the will of his absolute wisdom and knowledge through our more and more perfected Nature. This is
the sense of the self-surrender of the individual self to the Divine, \s{\=atma-samarpa\,na}. It does not exclude a will
for the delight of oneness, for participation in the divine consciousness, wisdom, knowledge, light, power,
perfection, for the satisfaction of the divine fulfilment in us, but the will, the aspiration is ours because it is his will
in us. At first, while there is still insistence on our own personality, it only reflects that, but becomes more and
more indistinguishable from it, less personal and eventually it loses all shade of separateness, because the will in
us has grown identical with the divine Tapas, the action of the divine Shakti.
\par And equally when we first become aware of the infinite Shakti above us or around or in us, the impulse of
the egoistic sense in us is to lay hold on it and use this increased might for our egoistic purpose. This is a most
dangerous thing, for it brings with it a sense and some increased reality of a great, sometimes a titanic power,
and the rajasic ego, delighting in this sense of new enormous strength, may instead of waiting for it to be purified
and transformed throw itself out in a violent and impure action and even turn us for a time or partially into the
selfish and arrogant Asura using the strength given him for his own and not for the divine purpose: but on that
way lies, in the
Page 766

end, if it is persisted in, spiritual perdition and material ruin. And even to regard oneself as the instrument of the
Divine is not a perfect remedy; for when a strong ego meddles in the matter, it falsifies the spiritual relation and
under cover of making itself an instrument of the Divine is really bent on making instead God its instrument. The
one remedy is to still the egoistic claim of whatever kind, to lessen persistently the personal effort and individual
straining which even the sattwic ego cannot avoid and instead of laying hold on the Shakti and using it for its
purpose rather to let the Shakti lay hold on us and use us for the divine purpose. This cannot be done perfectly at
once—nor can it be done safely if it is only the lower form of the universal energy of which we are aware, for
then, as has already been said, there must be some other control, either of the mental Purusha or from
above,—but still it is the aim which we must have before us and which can be wholly carried out when we
become insistently aware of the highest spiritual presence and form of the divine Shakti. This surrender too of
the whole action of the individual self to the Shakti is in fact a form of real self-surrender to the Divine.
\par It has been seen that a most effective way of purification is for the mental Purusha to draw back, to stand
as the passive witness and observe and know himself and the workings of Nature in the lower, the normal being;
but this must be combined, for perfection, with a will to raise the purified nature into the higher spiritual being.
When that is done, the Purusha is no longer only a witness, but also the master of his prakriti, \s{\=i\'svara}. At first
it may not be apparent how this ideal of active self-mastery can be reconciled with the apparently opposite ideal
of self-surrender and of becoming the assenting instrument of the divine Shakti. But in fact on the spiritual plane
there is no difficulty. The Jiva cannot really become master except in proportion as he arrives at oneness with
the Divine who is his supreme Self. And in that oneness and in his unity with the universe he is one too in the
universal self with the will that directs all the operations of Nature. But more directly, less transcendentally, in his
individual action too, he is a portion of the Divine and participates in the
Page 767

mastery over his nature of that to which he has surrendered himself. Even as instrument, he is not a mechanical
but a conscious instrument. On the Purusha side of him he is one with the Divine and participates in the divine
mastery of the Ishwara. On the nature side of him he is in his universality one with the power of the Divine,
while in his individual natural being he is an instrument of the universal divine Shakti, because the individualised
power is there to fulfil the purpose of the universal Power. The Jiva, as has been seen, is the meeting-place of
the play of the dual aspect of the Divine, Prakriti and Purusha, and in the higher spiritual consciousness he
becomes simultaneously one with both these aspects, and there he takes up and combines all the divine relations
created by their interaction. This it is that makes possible the dual attitude.
\par There is however a possibility of arriving at this result without the passage through the passivity of the
mental Purusha, by a more persistently and predominantly kinetic Yoga. Or there may be a combination of both
the methods, alternations between them and an ultimate fusion. And here the problem of spiritual action assumes
a more simple form. In this kinetic movement there are three stages. In the first the Jiva is aware of the supreme
Shakti, receives the power into himself and uses it under her direction, with a certain sense of being the
subordinate doer, a sense of minor responsibility in the action,—even at first, it may be, a responsibility for the
result; but that disappears, for the result is seen to be determined by the higher Power, and only the action is felt
to be partly his own. The sadhaka then feels that it is he who is thinking, willing, doing, but feels too the divine
Shakti or Prakriti behind driving and shaping all his thought, will, feeling and action: the individual energy belongs
in a way to him, but is still only a form and an instrument of the universal divine Energy. The Master of the
Power may be hidden from him for a time by the action of the Shakti, or he may be aware of the Ishwara
sometimes or continually manifest to him. In the latter case there are three things present to his consciousness,
himself as the servant of the Ishwara, the Shakti behind as a great Power supplying the energy, shaping the
action, formulating the results,
Page 768

the Ishwara above determining by his will the whole action.
\par In the second stage the individual doer disappears, but there is not necessarily any quietistic passivity; there
may be a full kinetic action, only all is done by the Shakti. It is her power of knowledge which takes shape as
thought in the mind; the sadhaka has no sense of himself thinking, but of the Shakti thinking in him. The will and
the feelings and action are also in the same way nothing but a formation, operation, activity of the Shakti in her
immediate presence and full possession of all the system. The sadhaka does not think, will, act, feel, but thought,
will, feeling, action happen in his system. The individual on the side of action has disappeared into oneness with
universal Prakriti, has become an individualised form and action of the divine Shakti. He is still aware of his
personal existence, but it is as the Purusha supporting and observing the whole action, conscious of it in his
self-knowledge and enabling by his participation the divine Shakti to do in him the works and the will of the
Ishwara. The Master of the power is then sometimes hidden by the action of the power, sometimes appears
governing it and compelling its workings. Here too there are three things present to the consciousness, the Shakti
carrying on all the knowledge, thought, will, feeling, action for the Ishwara in an instrumental human form, the
Ishwara, the Master of existence governing and compelling all her action, and ourself as the soul, the Purusha of
her individual action enjoying all the relations with him which are created by her workings. There is another form
of this realisation in which the Jiva disappears into and becomes one with the Shakti and there is then only the
play of the Shakti with the Ishwara, Mahadeva and Kali, Krishna and Radha, the Deva and the Devi. This is the
intensest possible form of the Jiva's realisation of himself as a manifestation of Nature, a power of the being of
the Divine, \s{par\=a prak\,rtir j\=iva-bh\=ut\=a}.
\par A third stage comes by the increasing manifestation of the Divine, the Ishwara in all our being and action.
This is when we are constantly and uninterruptedly aware of him. He is felt in us as the possessor of our being
and above us as the ruler of all its workings and they become to us nothing but a manifestation
Page 769

of him in the existence of the Jiva. All our consciousness is his consciousness, all our knowledge is his
knowledge, all our thought is his thought, all our will is his will, all our feeling is his Ananda and form of his delight
in being, all our action is his action. The distinction between the Shakti and the Ishwara begins to disappear; there
is only the conscious activity in us of the Divine with the great self of the Divine behind and around and
possessing it; all the world and Nature is seen to be only that, but here it has become fully conscious, the Maya
of the ego removed, and the Jiva is there only as an eternal portion of his being, \s{a\.m\'sa san\=atana}, put forth to
support a divine individualisation and living now fulfilled in the complete presence and power of the Divine, the
complete joy of the Spirit manifested in the being. This is the highest realisation of the perfection and delight of
the active oneness; for beyond it there could be only the consciousness of the Avatara, the Ishwara himself
assuming a human name and form for action in the Lila.
Page 770

\par
\hn Chapter XVIII
\par
\ht Faith and Shakti
\par\drop The three parts of the perfection of our instrumental nature of which we have till now been reviewing
the general features, the perfection of the intelligence, heart, vital consciousness and body, the perfection of the
fundamental soul powers, the perfection of the surrender of our instruments and action to the divine Shakti,
depend at every moment of their progression on a fourth power that is covertly and overtly the pivot of all
endeavour and action, faith, \s{\'sraddh\=a}. The perfect faith is an assent of the whole being to the truth seen by it
or offered to its acceptance, and its central working is a faith of the soul in its own will to be and attain and
become and its idea of self and things and its knowledge, of which the belief of the intellect, the heart's consent
and the desire of the life mind to possess and realise are the outward figures. This soul faith, in some form of
itself, is indispensable to the action of the being and without it man cannot move a single pace in life, much less
take any step forward to a yet unrealised perfection. It is so central and essential a thing that the Gita can justly
say of it that whatever is a man's \s{\'sraddh\=a}, that he is, \s{yo yacchraddha\,h sa eva sa\,h}, and, it may be added,
whatever he has the faith to see as possible in himself and strive for, that he can create and become. There is
one kind of faith demanded as indispensable by the integral Yoga and that may be described as faith in God and
the Shakti, faith in the presence and power of the Divine in us and the world, a faith that all in the world is the
working of one divine Shakti, that all the steps of the Yoga, its strivings and sufferings and failures as well as its
successes and satisfactions and victories are utilities and necessities of her workings and that by a firm and
strong dependence on and a total self-surrender to the Divine and to his Shakti in us we can attain to oneness
and freedom and victory and perfection.
Page 771

\par The enemy of faith is doubt, and yet doubt too is a utility and necessity, because man in his ignorance and in
his progressive labour towards knowledge needs to be visited by doubt, otherwise he would remain obstinate in
an ignorant belief and limited knowledge and unable to escape from his errors. This utility and necessity of doubt
does not altogether disappear when we enter on the path of Yoga. The integral Yoga aims at a knowledge not
merely of some fundamental principle, but a knowing, a gnosis which will apply itself to and cover all life and the
world action, and in this search for knowledge we enter on the way and are accompanied for many miles upon it
by the mind's unregenerated activities before these are purified and transformed by a greater light: we carry with
us a number of intellectual beliefs and ideas which are by no means all of them correct and perfect and a host of
new ideas and suggestions meet us afterwards demanding our credence which it would be fatal to seize on and
always cling to in the shape in which they come without regard to their possible error, limitation or imperfection.
And indeed at one stage in the Yoga it becomes necessary to refuse to accept as definite and final any kind of
intellectual idea or opinion whatever in its intellectual form and to hold it in a questioning suspension until it is
given its right place and luminous shape of truth in a spiritual experience enlightened by supramental knowledge.
And much more must this be the case with the desires or impulsions of the life mind, which have often to be
provisionally accepted as immediate indices of a temporarily necessary action before we have the full guidance,
but not always clung to with the soul's complete assent, for eventually all these desires and impulsions have to be
rejected or else transformed into and replaced by impulsions of the divine will taking up the life movements. The
heart's faith, emotional beliefs, assents are also needed upon the way, but cannot be always sure guides until they
too are taken up, purified, transformed and are eventually replaced by the luminous assents of a divine Ananda
which is at one with the divine will and knowledge. In nothing in the lower nature from the reason to the vital will
can the seeker of the Yoga put a complete and permanent faith, but only at last in the spiritual
Page 772

truth, power, Ananda which become in the spiritual reason his sole guides and luminaries and masters of action.
\par And yet faith is necessary throughout and at every step because it is a needed assent of the soul and without
this assent there can be no progress. Our faith must first be abiding in the essential truth and principles of the
Yoga, and even if this is clouded in the intellect, despondent in the heart, outwearied and exhausted by constant
denial and failure in the desire of the vital mind, there must be something in the innermost soul which clings and
returns to it, otherwise we may fall on the path or abandon it from weakness and inability to bear temporary
defeat, disappointment, difficulty and peril. In the Yoga as in life it is the man who persists unwearied to the last
in the face of every defeat and disillusionment and of all confronting, hostile and contradicting events and powers
who conquers in the end and finds his faith justified because to the soul and Shakti in man nothing is impossible.
And even a blind and ignorant faith is a better possession than the sceptical doubt which turns its back on our
spiritual possibilities or the constant carping of the narrow pettily critical uncreative intellect, \s{as\=uy\=a}, which
pursues our endeavour with a paralysing incertitude. The seeker of the integral Yoga must however conquer
both these imperfections. The thing to which he has given his assent and set his mind and heart and will to
achieve, the divine perfection of the whole human being, is apparently an impossibility to the normal intelligence,
since it is opposed to the actual facts of life and will for long be contradicted by immediate experience, as
happens with all far-off and difficult ends, and it is denied too by many who have spiritual experience but believe
that our present nature is the sole possible nature of man in the body and that it is only by throwing off the earthly
life or even all individual existence that we can arrive at either a heavenly perfection or the release of extinction.
In the pursuit of such an aim there will for long be plenty of ground for the objections, the carpings, \s{as\=uy\=a}, of
that ignorant but persistent criticising reason which founds itself plausibly on the appearances of the moment, the
stock of ascertained fact and experience, refuses to go beyond and questions the validity of all
Page 773

indices and illuminations that point forward; and if he yields to these narrow suggestions, he will either not arrive
or be seriously hampered and long delayed in his journey. On the other hand ignorance and blindness in the faith
are obstacles to a large success, invite much disappointment and disillusionment, fasten on false finalities and
prevent advance to greater formulations of truth and perfection. The Shakti in her workings will strike ruthlessly
at all forms of ignorance and blindness and all even that trusts wrongly and superstitiously in her, and we must be
prepared to abandon a too persistent attachment to forms of faith and cling to the saving reality alone. A great
and wide spiritual and intelligent faith, intelligent with the intelligence of that larger reason which assents to high
possibilities, is the character of the \s{\'sraddh\=a} needed for the integral Yoga.
\par This \s{\'sraddh\=a}—the English word faith is inadequate to express it—is in reality an influence from the
supreme Spirit and its light a message from our supramental being which is calling the lower nature to rise out of
its petty present to a great self-becoming and self-exceeding. And that which receives the influence and answers
to the call is not so much the intellect, the heart or the life mind, but the inner soul which better knows the truth of
its own destiny and mission. The circumstances that provoke our first entry into the path are not the real index of
the thing that is at work in us. There the intellect, the heart, or the desires of the life mind may take a prominent
place, or even more fortuitous accidents and outward incentives; but if these are all, then there can be no surety
of our fidelity to the call and our enduring perseverance in the Yoga. The intellect may abandon the idea that
attracted it, the heart weary or fail us, the desire of the life mind turn to other objectives. But outward
circumstances are only a cover for the real workings of the spirit, and if it is the spirit that has been touched, the
inward soul that has received the call, the \s{\'sraddh\=a} will remain firm and resist all attempts to defeat or slay it.
It is not that the doubts of the intellect may not assail, the heart waver, the disappointed desire of the life mind
sink down exhausted on the wayside. That is almost inevitable at times, perhaps often, especially with us, sons of
an
Page 774

age of intellectuality and scepticism and a materialistic denial of spiritual truth which has not yet lifted its painted
clouds from the face of the sun of a greater reality and is still opposed to the light of spiritual intuition and inmost
experience. There will very possibly be many of those trying obscurations of which even the Vedic Rishis so
often complained, “long exiles from the light”, and these may be so thick, the night on the soul may be so black
that faith may seem utterly to have left us. But through it all the spirit within will be keeping its unseen hold and
the soul will return with a new strength to its assurance which was only eclipsed and not extinguished, because
extinguished it cannot be when once the inner self has known and made its resolution.
\note{\s{sa\.nkalpa}, \s{vyavas\=aya}.} The Divine holds our hand through all and if he seems to let us fall, it is only
to raise us higher. This saving return we shall experience so often that the denials of doubt will become
eventually impossible and, when once the foundation of equality is firmly established and still more when the sun
of the gnosis has risen, doubt itself will pass away because its cause and utility have ended.
\par Moreover not only a faith in the fundamental principle, ideas, way of the Yoga is needed, but a day to day
working faith in the power in us to achieve, in the steps we have taken on the way, in the spiritual experiences
that come to us, in the intuitions, the guiding movements of will and impulsion, the moved intensities of the heart
and aspirations and fulfilments of the life that are the aids, the circumstances and the stages of the enlarging of
the nature and the stimuli or the steps of the soul's evolution. At the same time it has always to be remembered
that we are moving from imperfection and ignorance towards light and perfection, and the faith in us must be
free from attachment to the forms of our endeavour and the successive stages of our realisation. There is not
only much that will be strongly raised in us in order to be cast out and rejected, a battle between the powers of
ignorance and the lower nature and the higher powers that have to replace them, but experiences, states of
thought
Page 775

and feeling, forms of realisation that are helpful and have to be accepted on the way and may seem to us for the
time to be spiritual finalities, are found afterwards to be steps of transition, have to be exceeded and the working
faith that supported them withdrawn in favour of other and greater things or of more full and comprehensive
realisations and experiences, which replace them or into which they are taken up in a completing transformation.
There can be for the seeker of the integral Yoga no clinging to resting-places on the road or to half-way houses;
he cannot be satisfied till he has laid down all the great enduring bases of his perfection and broken out into its
large and free infinities, and even there he has to be constantly filling himself with more experiences of the
Infinite. His progress is an ascent from level to level and each new height brings in other vistas and revelations of
the much that has still to be done, \s{bh\=uri kartvam}, till the divine Shakti has at last taken up all his endeavour
and he has only to assent and participate gladly by a consenting oneness in her luminous workings. That which
will support him through these changes, struggles, transformations which might otherwise dishearten and
baffle,—for the intellect and life and emotion always grasp too much at things, fasten on premature certitudes
and are apt to be afflicted and unwilling when forced to abandon that on which they rested,—is a firm faith in the
Shakti that is at work and reliance on the guidance of the Master of the Yoga whose wisdom is not in haste and
whose steps through all the perplexities of the mind are assured and just and sound, because they are founded on
a perfectly comprehending transaction with the necessities of our nature.
\par The progress of the Yoga is a procession from the mental ignorance through imperfect formations to a
perfect foundation and increasing of knowledge and in its more satisfyingly positive parts a movement from light
to greater light, and it cannot cease till we have the greatest light of the supramental knowledge. The motions of
the mind in its progress must necessarily be mixed with a greater or lesser proportion of error, and we should not
allow our faith to be disconcerted by the discovery of its errors or imagine that because the beliefs of the intellect
which aided
Page 776

us were too hasty and positive, therefore the fundamental faith in the soul was invalid. The human intellect is too
much afraid of error precisely because it is too much attached to a premature sense of certitude and a too hasty
eagerness for positive finality in what it seems to seize of knowledge. As our self-experience increases, we shall
find that our errors even were necessary movements, brought with them and left their element or suggestion of
truth and helped towards discovery or supported a necessary effort and that the certitudes we have now to
abandon had yet their temporary validity in the progress of our knowledge. The intellect cannot be a sufficient
guide in the search for spiritual truth and realisation and yet it has to be utilised in the integral movement of our
nature. And while, therefore, we have to reject paralysing doubt or mere intellectual scepticism, the seeking
intelligence has to be trained to admit a certain large questioning, an intellectual rectitude not satisfied with
half-truths, mixtures of error or approximations and, most positive and helpful, a perfect readiness always to
move forward from truths already held and accepted to the greater corrective, completing or transcending truths
which at first it was unable or, it may be, disinclined to envisage. A working faith of the intellect is indispensable,
not a superstitious, dogmatic or limiting credence attached to every temporary support or formula, but a large
assent to the successive suggestions and steps of the Shakti, a faith fixed on realities, moving from the lesser to
the completer realities and ready to throw down all scaffolding and keep only the large and growing structure.
\par A constant \s{\'sraddh\=a}, faith, assent of the heart and the life too are indispensable. But while we are in the
lower nature the heart's assent is coloured by mental emotion and the life movements are accompanied by their
trail of perturbing or straining desires, and mental emotion and desire tend to trouble, alter more or less grossly or
subtly or distort the truth, and they always bring some limitation and imperfection into its realisation by the heart
and life. The heart too when it is troubled in its attachments and its certitudes, perplexed by throw-backs and
failures and convictions of error or involved in the wrestlings
Page 777

which attend a call to move forward from its assured positions, has its draggings, wearinesses, sorrowings,
revolts, reluctances which hamper the progress. It must learn a larger and surer faith giving in the place of the
mental reactions a calm or a moved spiritual acceptance to the ways and the steps of the Shakti which is in its
nature the assent of a deepening Ananda to all necessary movements and a readiness to leave old moorings and
move always forward towards the delight of a greater perfection. The life mind must give its assent to the
successive motives, impulsions, activities of the life imposed on it by the guiding power as aids or fields of the
development of the nature and to the successions also of the inner Yoga, but it must not be attached or call a halt
anywhere, but must always be prepared to abandon old urgency and accept with the same completeness of
assent new higher movements and activities, and it must learn to replace desire by a wide and bright Ananda in
all experience and action. The faith of the heart and the life mind, like that of the intelligence, must be capable of
a constant correction, enlarging and transformation.
\par This faith is essentially the secret \s{\'sraddh\=a} of the soul, and it is brought more and more to the surface
and there satisfied, sustained and increased by an increasing assurance and certainty of spiritual experience.
Here too the faith in us must be unattached, a faith that waits upon Truth and is prepared to change and enlarge
its understanding of spiritual experiences, to correct mistaken or half-true ideas about them and receive more
enlightening interpretations, to replace insufficient by more sufficient intuitions, and to merge experiences that
seemed at the time to be final and satisfying in more satisfying combinations with new experience and greater
largenesses and transcendences. And especially in the psychical and other middle domains there is a very large
room for the possibility of misleading and often captivating error, and here even a certain amount of positive
scepticism has its use and at all events a great caution and scrupulous intellectual rectitude, but not the scepticism
of the ordinary mind which amounts to a disabling denial. In the integral Yoga psychical experience, especially of
the kind associated with what
Page 778

is often called occultism and savours of the miraculous, should be altogether subordinated to spiritual truth and
wait upon that for its own interpretation, illumination and sanction. But even in the purely spiritual domain, there
are experiences which are partial and, however attractive, only receive their full validity, significance or right
application when we can advance to a fuller experience. And there are others which are in themselves quite
valid and full and absolute, but if we confine ourselves to them, will prevent other sides of the spiritual truth from
manifestation and mutilate the integrality of the Yoga. Thus the profound and absorbing quietude of impersonal
peace which comes by the stilling of the mind is a thing in itself complete and absolute, but if we rest in that
alone, it will exclude the companion absolute, not less great and needed and true, of the bliss of the divine action.
Here too our faith must be an assent that receives all spiritual experience, but with a wide openness and
readiness for always more light and truth, an absence of limiting attachment and no such clinging to forms as
would interfere with the forward movement of the Shakti towards the integrality of the spiritual being,
consciousness, knowledge, power, action and the wholeness of the one and the multiple Ananda.
\par The faith demanded of us both in its general principle and its constant particular application amounts to a
large and ever increasing and a constantly purer, fuller and stronger assent of the whole being and all its parts to
the presence and guidance of God and the Shakti. The faith in the Shakti, as long as we are not aware of and
filled with her presence, must necessarily be preceded or at least accompanied by a firm and virile faith in our
own spiritual will and energy and our power to move successfully towards unity and freedom and perfection.
Man is given faith in himself, his ideas and his powers that he may work and create and rise to greater things and
in the end bring his strength as a worthy offering to the altar of the Spirit. This spirit, says the Scripture, is not to
be won by the weak, \s{n\=ayam \=atm\=a balah\=inena labhya\,h}. All paralysing self-distrust has to be discouraged, all
doubt of our strength to accomplish, for that is a false assent to impotence, an imagination of weakness and
Page 779

a denial of the omnipotence of the spirit. A present incapacity, however heavy may seem its pressure, is only a
trial of faith and a temporary difficulty and to yield to the sense of inability is for the seeker of the integral Yoga
a non-sense, for his object is a development of a perfection that is there already, latent in the being, because man
carries the seed of the divine life in himself, in his own spirit, the possibility of success is involved and implied in
the effort and victory is assured because behind is the call and guidance of an omnipotent power. At the same
time this faith in oneself must be purified from all touch of rajasic egoism and spiritual pride. The sadhaka should
keep as much as possible in his mind the idea that his strength is not his own in the egoistic sense but that of the
divine universal Shakti and whatever is egoistic in his use of it must be a cause of limitation and in the end an
obstacle. The power of the divine universal Shakti which is behind our aspiration is illimitable, and when it is
rightly called upon it cannot fail to pour itself into us and to remove whatever incapacity and obstacle, now or
later; for the times and durations of our struggle while they depend at first, instrumentally and in part, on the
strength of our faith and our endeavour, are yet eventually in the hands of the wisely determining secret Spirit,
alone the Master of the Yoga, the Ishwara.
\par The faith in the divine Shakti must be always at the back of our strength and when she becomes manifest, it
must be or grow implicit and complete. There is nothing that is impossible to her who is the conscious Power and
universal Goddess all-creative from eternity and armed with the Spirit's omnipotence. All knowledge, all
strengths, all triumph and victory, all skill and works are in her hands and they are full of the treasures of the
Spirit and of all perfections and siddhis. She is Maheshwari, goddess of the supreme knowledge, and brings to us
her vision for all kinds and widenesses of truth, her rectitude of the spiritual will, the calm and passion of her
supramental largeness, her felicity of illumination: she is Mahakali, goddess of the supreme strength, and with her
are all mights and spiritual force and severest \NH austerity of tapas and swiftness to the battle and the victory
and
Page 780

the laughter, the \s{a\,t\,tah\=asya}, that makes light of defeat and death and the powers of the ignorance: she is
Mahalakshmi, the goddess of the supreme love and delight, and her gifts are the spirit's grace and the charm and
beauty of the Ananda and protection and every divine and human blessing: she is Mahasaraswati, the goddess of
divine skill and of the works of the Spirit, and hers is the Yoga that is skill in works, \s{yoga\,h karmasu
kau\'salam}, and the utilities of divine knowledge and the self-application of the spirit to life and the happiness of
its harmonies. And in all her powers and forms she carries with her the supreme sense of the masteries of the
eternal Ishwari, a rapid and divine capacity for all kinds of action that may be demanded from the instrument,
oneness, a participating sympathy, a free identity, with all energies in all beings and therefore a spontaneous and
fruitful harmony with all the divine will in the universe. The intimate feeling of her presence and her powers and
the satisfied assent of all our being to her workings in and around it is the last perfection of faith in the Shakti.
\par And behind her is the Ishwara and faith in him is the most central thing in the \s{\'sraddh\=a} of the integral
Yoga. This faith we must have and develop to perfection that all things are the workings under the universal
conditions of a supreme self-knowledge and wisdom, that nothing done in us or around us is in vain or without its
appointed place and just significance, that all things are possible when the Ishwara as our supreme Self and Spirit
takes up the action and that all that has been done before and all that he will do hereafter was and will be part of
his infallible and foreseeing guidance and intended towards the fruition of our Yoga and our perfection and our
life work. This faith will be more and more justified as the higher knowledge opens, we shall begin to see the
great and small significances that escaped our limited mentality and faith will pass into knowledge. Then we shall
see beyond the possibility of doubt that all happens within the working of the one Will and that that will was also
wisdom because it develops always the true workings in life of the self and nature. The highest state of the
assent, the \s{\'sraddh\=a} of the being will be when we feel the presence of the Ishwara
Page 781

and feel all our existence and consciousness and thought and will and action in his hand and consent in all things
and with every part of our self and nature to the direct and immanent and occupying will of the Spirit. And that
highest perfection of the \s{\'sraddh\=a} will also be the opportunity and perfect foundation of a divine strength: it
will base, when complete, the development and manifestation and the works of the luminous supramental Shakti.
Page 782

\par
\hn Chapter XIX
\par
\ht The Nature of the Supermind
\par\drop The object of Yoga is to raise the human being from the consciousness of the ordinary mind subject to
the control of vital and material Nature and limited wholly by birth and death and Time and the needs and desires
of the mind, life and body to the consciousness of the spirit free in its self and using the circumstances of mind,
life and body as admitted or self-chosen and self-figuring determinations of the spirit, using them in a free
self-knowledge, a free will and power of being, a free delight of being. This is the essential difference between
the ordinary mortal mind in which we live and the spiritual consciousness of our divine and immortal being which
is the highest result of Yoga. It is a radical conversion as great as and greater than the change which we
suppose evolutionary Nature to have made in its transition from the vital animal to the fully mentalised human
consciousness. The animal has the conscious vital mind, but whatever beginnings there are in it of anything
higher are only a primary glimpse, a crude hint of the intelligence which in man becomes the splendour of the
mental understanding, will, emotion, aesthesis and reason. Man elevated in the heights and deepened by the
intensities of the mind becomes aware of something great and divine in himself towards which all this tends,
something he is in possibility but which he has not yet become, and he turns the powers of his mind, his power of
knowledge, his power of will, his power of emotion and aesthesis to seek out this, to seize and comprehend all
that it may be, to become it and to exist wholly in its greater consciousness, delight, being and power of highest
becoming. But what he gets of this higher state in his normal mind is only an intimation, a primary glimpse, a
crude hint of the splendour, the light, the glory and divinity of the spirit within him. A complete conversion of all
the parts of his being into moulds and
Page 783

instruments of the spiritual consciousness is demanded of him before he can make quite real, constant, present to
himself this greater thing that he can be and entirely live in what is now to him at the best a luminous aspiration.
He must seek to develop and grow altogether into a greater divine consciousness by an integral Yoga.
\par The Yoga of perfection necessary to this change has, so far as we have been considering it, consisted in a
preparatory purification of the mental, vital and physical nature, a liberation from the knots of the lower Prakriti, a
consequent replacement of the egoistic state always subject to the ignorant and troubled action of the desire soul
by a large and luminous static equality which quiets the reason, the emotional mind, the life mind and the physical
nature and brings into us the peace and freedom of the spirit, and a dynamical substitution of the action of the
supreme and universal divine Shakti under the control of the Ishwara for that of the lower Prakriti,—an action
whose complete operation must be preceded by the perfection of the natural instruments. And all these things
together, though not as yet the whole Yoga, constitute already a much greater than the present normal
consciousness, spiritual in its basis and moved by a greater light, power and bliss, and it might be easy to rest
satisfied with so much accomplished and think that all has been done that was needed for the divine conversion.
\par A momentous question however arises as light grows, the question through what medium is the divine Shakti
to act in the human being? Is it to be always through the mind only and on the mind plane or in some greater
supramental formulation which is more proper to a divine action and which will take up and replace the mental
functions? If the mind is to be always the instrument, then although we shall be conscious of a diviner Power
initiating and conducting all our inner and outer human action, yet it will have to formulate its knowledge, will,
Ananda and all things else in the mental figure, and that means to translate them into an inferior kind of
functioning other than the supreme workings native to the divine consciousness and its Shakti. The mind
spiritualised, purified, liberated, perfected
Page 784

within its own limits may come as near as possible to a faithful mental translation, but we shall find that this is
after all a relative fidelity and an imperfect perfection. The mind by its very nature cannot render with an entirely
right rightness or act in the unified completeness of the divine knowledge, will and Ananda because it is an
instrument for dealing with the divisions of the finite on the basis of division, a secondary instrument therefore
and a sort of delegate for the lower movement in which we live. The mind can reflect the Infinite, it can dissolve
itself into it, it can live in it by a large passivity, it can take its suggestions and act them out in its own way, a way
always fragmentary, derivative and subject to a greater or less deformation, but it cannot be itself the direct and
perfect instrument of the infinite Spirit acting in its own knowledge. The divine Will and Wisdom organising the
action of the infinite consciousness and determining all things according to the truth of the spirit and the law of its
manifestation is not mental but supramental and even in its formulation nearest to mind as much above the mental
consciousness in its light and power as the mental consciousness of man above the vital mind of the lower
creation. The question is how far the perfected human being can raise himself above mind, enter into some kind
of fusing union with the supramental and build up in himself a level of supermind, a developed gnosis by the form
and power of which the divine Shakti can directly act, not through a mental translation, but organically in her
supramental nature.
\par It is here necessary in a matter so remote from the ordinary lines of our thought and experience to state first
what is the universal gnosis or divine supermind, how it is represented in the actual movement of the universe
and what are its relations to the present psychology of the human being. It will then be evident that though the
supermind is suprarational to our intelligence and its workings occult to our apprehension, it is nothing irrationally
mystic, but rather its existence and emergence is a logical necessity of the nature of existence, always provided
we grant that not matter or mind alone but spirit is the fundamental reality and everywhere a universal presence.
All things are a manifestation of the infinite spirit out of its own being, out of
Page 785

its own consciousness and by the self-realising, self-determining, self-fulfilling power of that consciousness. The
Infinite, we may say, organises by the power of its self-knowledge the law of its own manifestation of being in
the universe, not only the material universe present to our senses, but whatever lies behind it on whatever planes
of existence. All is organised by it not under any inconscient compulsion, not according to a mental fantasy or
caprice, but in its own infinite spiritual freedom according to the self-truth of its being, its infinite potentialities and
its will of self-creation out of those potentialities, and the law of this self-truth is the necessity that compels
created things to act and evolve each according to its own nature. The Intelligence—to give it an inadequate
name—the Logos that thus organises its own manifestation is evidently something infinitely greater, more
extended in knowledge, compelling in self-power, large both in the delight of its self-existence and the delight of
its active being and works than the mental intelligence which is to us the highest realised degree and expression
of consciousness. It is to this intelligence infinite in itself but freely organising and self-determiningly organic in its
self-creation and its works that we may give for our present purpose the name of the divine supermind or gnosis.
\par The fundamental nature of this supermind is that all its knowledge is originally a knowledge by identity and
oneness and even when it makes numberless apparent divisions and discriminating modifications in itself, still all
the knowledge that operates in its workings, even in these divisions, is founded upon and sustained and lit and
guided by this perfect knowledge by identity and oneness. The Spirit is one everywhere and it knows all things as
itself and in itself, so sees them always and therefore knows them intimately, completely, in their reality as well
as their appearance, in their truth, their law, the entire spirit and sense and figure of their nature and their
workings. When it sees anything as an object of knowledge, it yet sees it as itself and in itself, and not as a thing
other than or divided from it about which therefore it would at first be ignorant of the nature, constitution and
workings and have to learn about them, as the
Page 786

mind is at first ignorant of its object and has to learn about it because the mind is separated from its object and
regards and senses and meets it as something other than itself and external to its own being. The mental
awareness we have of our own subjective existence and its movements, though it may point to, is not the same
thing as this identity and self-knowledge, because what it sees are mental figures of our being and not the inmost
or the whole and it is only a partial, derivative and superficial action of our self that appears to us while the
largest and most secretly determining parts of our own existence are occult to our mentality. The supramental
Spirit has, unlike the mental being, the real because the inmost and total knowledge of itself and of all its universe
and of all things that are its creations and self-figurings in the universe.
\par This is the second character of the supreme Supermind that its knowledge is a real because a total
knowledge. It has in the first place a transcendental vision and sees the universe not only in the universal terms,
but in its right relation to the supreme and eternal reality from which it proceeds and of which it is an expression.
It knows the spirit and truth and whole sense of the universal expression because it knows all the essentiality and
all the infinite reality and all the consequent constant potentiality of that which in part it expresses. It knows
rightly the relative because it knows the Absolute and all its absolutes to which the relatives refer back and of
which they are the partial or modified or suppressed figures. It is in the second place universal and sees all that is
individual in the terms of the universal as well as in its own individual terms and holds all these individual figures
in their right and complete relation to the universe. It is in the third place, separately with regard to individual
things, total in its view because it knows each in its inmost essence of which all else is the resultant, in its totality
which is its complete figure and in its parts and their connections and dependences,—as well as in its connections
with and its dependences upon other things and its nexus with the total implications and the explicits of the
universe.
\par The mind on the contrary is limited and incapable in all these
Page 787

directions. Mind cannot arrive at identity with the Absolute even when by a stretch of the intellect it conceives
the idea, but can only disappear into it in a swoon or extinction: it can only have a kind of sense or an intimation
of certain absolutes which it puts by the mental idea into a relative figure. It cannot grasp the universal, but only
arrives at some idea of it through an extension of the individual or a combination of apparently separate things
and so sees it either as a vague infinite or indeterminate or a half-determined largeness or else only in an external
scheme or constructed figure. The indivisible being and action of the universal, which is its real truth, escapes the
apprehension of the mind, because the mind thinks it out analytically by taking its own divisions for units and
synthetically by combinations of these units, but cannot seize on and think entirely in the terms, though it may get
at the idea and certain secondary results, of the essential oneness. It cannot, either, know truly and thoroughly
even the individual and apparently separate thing, because it proceeds in the same way, by an analysis of parts
and constituents and properties and a combination by which it erects a scheme of it which is only its external
figure. It can get an intimation of the essential inmost truth of its object, but cannot live constantly and luminously
in that essential knowledge and work out on the rest from within outward so that the outward circumstances
appear in their intimate reality and meaning as inevitable result and expression and form and action of the
spiritual something which is the reality of the object. And all this which is impossible for the mind to do, but
possible only to strive towards and figure, is inherent and natural to the supramental knowledge.
\par The third characteristic of the supermind arising from this difference, which brings us to the practical
distinction between the two kinds of knowledge, is that it is directly truth-conscious, a divine power of immediate,
inherent and spontaneous knowledge, an Idea holding luminously all realities and not depending on indications and
logical or other steps from the known to the unknown like the mind which is a power of the Ignorance. The
supermind contains all its knowledge in itself, is in its highest divine wisdom in eternal possession of all truth and
even in its
Page 788

lower, limited or individualised forms has only to bring the latent truth out of itself,—the perception which the old
thinkers tried to express when they said that all knowing was in its real origin and nature only a memory of
inwardly existing knowledge. The supermind is eternally and on all levels truth-conscious and exists secretly even
in mental and material being, surveys and knows the things, even obscurest, of the mental ignorance and
understands and is behind and governs its processes, because everything in the mind derives from the
supermind—and must do so because everything derives from the spirit. All that is mental is but a partial, a
modified, a suppressed or half-suppressed figure of the supramental truth, a deformation or a derived and
imperfect figure of its greater knowledge. The mind begins with ignorance and proceeds towards knowledge. As
an actual fact, in the material universe, it appears out of an initial and universal inconscience which is really an
involution of the all-conscient spirit in its own absorbed self-oblivious force of action; and it appears therefore as
part of an evolutionary process, first a vital feeling towards overt sensation, then an emergence of a vital mind
capable of sensation and, evolving out of it, a mind of emotion and desire, a conscious will, a growing intelligence.
And each stage is an emergence of a greater suppressed power of the secret supermind and spirit.
\par The mind of man, capable of reflection and a coordinated investigation and understanding of itself and its
basis and surroundings, arrives at truth but against a background of original ignorance, a truth distressed by a
constant surrounding mist of incertitude and error. Its certitudes are relative and for the most part precarious
certainties or else are the assured fragmentary certitudes only of an imperfect, incomplete and not an essential
experience. It makes discovery after discovery, gets idea after idea, adds experience to experience and
experiment to experiment,—but losing and rejecting and forgetting and having to recover much as it
proceeds,—and it tries to establish a relation between all that it knows by setting up logical and other sequences,
a series of principles and their dependences, generalisations and their application, and makes out of its devices a
Page 789

structure in which mentally it can live, move and act and enjoy and labour. This mental knowledge is always
limited in extent: not only so, but in addition the mind even sets up other willed barriers, admitting by the mental
device of opinion certain parts and sides of truth and excluding all the rest, because if it gave free admission and
play to all ideas, if it suffered truth's infinities, it would lose itself in an unreconciled variety, an undetermined
immensity and would be unable to act and proceed to practical consequences and an effective creation. And
even when it is widest and most complete, mental knowing is still an indirect knowledge, a knowledge not of the
thing in itself but of its figures, a system of representations, a scheme of indices,—except indeed when in certain
movements it goes beyond itself, beyond the mental idea to spiritual identity, but it finds it extremely difficult to go
here beyond a few isolated and intense spiritual realisations or to draw or work out or organise the right practical
consequences of these rare identities of knowledge. A greater power than the reason is needed for the spiritual
comprehension and effectuation of this deepest knowledge.
\par This is what the supermind, intimate with the Infinite, alone can do. The supermind sees directly the spirit
and essence, the face and body, the result and action, the principles and dependences of the truth as one
indivisible whole and therefore can work out the circumstantial results in the power of the essential knowledge,
the variations of the spirit in the light of its identities, its apparent divisions in the truth of its oneness. The
supermind is a knower and creator of its own truth, the mind of man only a knower and creator in the half light
and half darkness of a mingled truth and error, and creator too of a thing which it derives altered, translated,
lessened from something greater than and beyond it. Man lives in a mental consciousness between a vast
subconscient which is to his seeing a dark inconscience and a vaster superconscient which he is apt to take for
another but a luminous inconscience, because his idea of consciousness is confined to his own middle term of
mental sensation and intelligence. It is in that luminous superconscience that there lie the ranges of the supermind
and the spirit.
Page 790

\par The supermind is again, because it acts and creates as well as knows, not only a direct truth-consciousness,
but an illumined, direct and spontaneous truth-will. There is not and cannot be in the will of the self-knowing spirit
any contradiction, division or difference between its will and its knowledge. The spiritual will is the Tapas or
enlightened force of the conscious being of the spirit effecting infallibly what is there within it, and it is this
infallible operation of things acting according to their own nature, of energy producing result and event according
to the force within it, of action bearing the fruit and event involved in its own character and intention which we
call variously in its different aspects law of Nature, Karma, Necessity and Fate. These things are to mind the
workings of a power outside or above it in which it is involved and intervenes only with a contributory personal
effort which partly arrives and succeeds, partly fails and stumbles and which even in succeeding is largely
overruled for issues different from or at any rate greater and more far-reaching than its own intention. The will
of man works in the ignorance by a partial light or more often flickerings of light which mislead as much as they
illuminate. His mind is an ignorance striving to erect standards of knowledge, his will an ignorance striving to
erect standards of right, and his whole mentality as a result very much a house divided against itself, idea in
conflict with idea, the will often in conflict with the ideal of right or the intellectual knowledge. The will itself
takes different shapes, the will of the intelligence, the wishes of the emotional mind, the desires and the passion
of the vital being, the impulsions and blind or half-blind compulsions of the nervous and the subconscient nature,
and all these make by no means a harmony, but at best a precarious concord among discords. The will of the
mind and life is a stumbling about in search of right force, right Tapas which can wholly be attained in its true and
complete light and direction only by oneness with the spiritual and supramental being.
\par The supramental nature on the contrary is just, harmonious and one, will and knowledge there only light of
the spirit and power of the spirit, the power effecting the light, the light
Page 791

illumining the power. In the highest supramentality they are intimately fused together and do not even wait upon
each other but are one movement, will illumining itself, knowledge fulfilling itself, both together a single jet of the
being. The mind knows only the present and lives in an isolated movement of it though it tries to remember and
retain the past and forecast and compel the future. The supermind has the vision of the three times,
\s{trik\=alad\,r\,s\,ti}; it sees them as an indivisible movement and sees too each containing the others. It is aware of all
tendencies, energies and forces as the diverse play of unity and knows their relation to each other in the single
movement of the one spirit. The supramental will and action are therefore a will and action of the spontaneous
self-fulfilling truth of the spirit, the right and at the highest the infallible movement of a direct and total
knowledge.
\par The supreme and universal Supermind is the active Light and Tapas of the supreme and universal Self as
the Lord and Creator, that which we come to know in Yoga as the divine Wisdom and Power, the eternal
knowledge and will of the Ishwara. On the highest planes of Being where all is known and all manifests as
existences of the one existence, consciousnesses of the one consciousness, delight's self-creations of the one
Ananda, many truths and powers of the one Truth, there is the intact and integral display of its spiritual and
supramental knowledge. And in the corresponding planes of our own being the Jiva shares in the spiritual and
supramental nature and lives in its light and power and bliss. As we descend nearer to what we are in this world,
the presence and action of this self-knowledge narrows but retains always the essence and character when not
the fullness of the supramental nature and its way of knowing and willing and acting, because it still lives in the
essence and body of the spirit. The mind, when we trace the descent of the self towards matter, we see as a
derivation which travels away from the fullness of self, the fullness of its light and being and which lives in a
division and diversion, not in the body of the sun, but first in its nearer and then in its far-off rays. There is a
highest intuitive mind which receives more nearly the
Page 792

supramental truth, but even this is a formation which conceals the direct and greater real knowledge. There is an
intellectual mind which is a luminous half-opaque lid which intercepts and reflects in a radiantly distorting and
suppressively modifying atmosphere the truth known to the supermind. There is a still lower mind built on the
foundation of the senses between which and the sun of knowledge there is a thick cloud, an emotional and a
sensational mist and vapour with here and there lightnings and illuminations. There is a vital mind which is shut
away even from the light of intellectual truth, and lower still in submental life and matter the spirit involves itself
entirely as if in a sleep and a night, a sleep plunged in a dim and yet poignant nervous dream, the night of a
mechanical somnambulist energy. It is a re-evolution of the spirit out of this lowest state in which we find
ourselves at a height above the lower creation having taken it up all in us and reaching so far in our ascent only
the light of the well-developed mental reason. The full powers of self-knowledge and the illumined will of the
spirit are still beyond us above the mind and reason in supramental Nature.
\par If the spirit is everywhere, even in matter—in fact matter itself is only an obscure form of the spirit—and if
the supermind is the universal power of the spirit's omnipresent self-knowledge organising all the manifestation of
the being, then in matter and everywhere there must be present a supramental action and, however concealed it
may be by another, lower and obscurer kind of operation, yet when we look close we shall find that it is really the
supermind which organises matter, life, mind and reason. And this actually is the knowledge towards which we
are now moving. There is even a quite visible intimate action of the consciousness, persistent in life, matter and
mind, which is clearly a supramental action subdued to the character and need of the lower medium and to which
we now give the name of intuition from its most evident characteristics of direct vision and self-acting
knowledge, really a vision born of some secret identity with the object of the knowledge. What we call the
intuition is however only a partial indication of the presence of the supermind, and if we take this presence and
power in its widest
Page 793

character, we shall see that it is a concealed supramental force with a self-conscient knowledge in it which
informs the whole action of material energy. It is that which determines what we call law of nature, maintains
the action of each thing according to its own nature and harmonises and evolves the whole, which would
otherwise be a fortuitous creation apt at any moment to collapse into chaos. All the law of nature is a thing
precise in its necessities of process, but is yet in the cause of that necessity and of its constancy of rule, measure,
combination, adaptation, result a thing inexplicable, meeting us at every step with a mystery and a miracle, and
this must be either because it is irrational and accidental even in its regularities or because it is suprarational,
because the truth of it belongs to a principle greater than that of our intelligence. That principle is the
supramental; that is to say, the hidden secret of Nature is the organisation of something out of the infinite
potentialities of the self-existent truth of the spirit the nature of which is wholly evident only to an original
knowledge born of and proceeding by a fundamental identity, the spirit's constant self-perception. All the action
of life too is of this character and all the action of mind and reason,—reason which is the first to perceive
everywhere the action of a greater reason and law of being and try to render it by its own conceptional
structures, though it does not always perceive that it is something other than a mental Intelligence which is at
work, other than an intellectual Logos. All these processes are actually spiritual and supramental in their secret
government, but mental, vital and physical in their overt process.
\par The outward matter, life, mind do not possess this occult action of the supermind, even while possessed and
compelled by the necessity it imposes on their workings. There is what we are sometimes moved to call an
intelligence and will operating in the material force and the atom (although the words ring false because it is not
actually the same thing as our own will and intelligence),—let us say, a covert intuition of self-existence at
work,—but the atom and force are not aware of it and are only the obscure body of matter and of power created
by its first effort of self-manifestation. The presence of such an intuition becomes
Page 794

more evident to us in all the action of life because that is nearer to our own scale. And as life develops overt
sense and mind, as in the animal creation, we can speak more confidently of a vital intuition which is behind its
operations and which emerges in the animal mind in the clear form of instinct,—instinct, an automatic knowledge
implanted in the animal, sure, direct, self-existent, self-guided, which implies somewhere in its being an accurate
knowing of purpose, relation and the thing or object. It acts in the life force and mind, but yet the surface life and
mind do not possess it and cannot give an account of what it does or control or extend the power at its will and
pleasure. Here we observe two things, first, that the overt intuition acts only for a limited necessity and purpose,
and that in the rest of the operations of the nature there is a double action, one uncertain and ignorant of the
surface consciousness and the other subliminal implying a secret subconscient direction. The surface
consciousness is full of a groping and seeking which increases rather than diminishes as life rises in its scale and
widens in the scope of its conscious powers; but the secret self within assures in spite of the groping of the vital
mind the action of the nature and the result needed for the necessity, the purpose and the destiny of the being.
This continues on a higher and higher scale up to the human reason and intelligence.
\par The being of man also is full of physical, vital, emotional, psychical and dynamic instincts and intuitions, but
he does not rely on them as the animal does,—though they are capable in him of a far larger scope and greater
action than in the animal and lower creation by reason of his greater actual evolutionary development and his yet
greater potentiality of development of the being. He has suppressed them, discontinued their full and overt action
by atrophy,—not that these capacities are destroyed but rather held back or cast back into the subliminal
consciousness,—and consequently this lower part of his being is much less sure of itself, much less confident of
the directions of his nature, much more groping, errant and fallible in its larger scope than that of the animal in his
lesser limits. This happens because man's real dharma and law of being is to seek for a
Page 795

greater self-aware existence, a self-manifestation no longer obscure and governed by an ununderstood necessity,
but illumined, conscious of that which is expressing itself and able to give it a fuller and more perfect expression.
And finally his culmination must be to identify himself with his greatest and real self and act or rather let it act
(his natural existence being an instrumental form of the expression of the spirit) in its spontaneous perfect will
and knowledge. His first instrument for this transition is the reason and the will of the rational intelligence and he
is moved to depend upon that to the extent of its development for his knowledge and guidance and give it the
control of the rest of his being. And if the reason were the highest thing and the greatest all-sufficient means of
the self and spirit, he could by it know perfectly and guide perfectly all the movements of his nature. This he
cannot do entirely because his self is a larger thing than his reason and if he limits himself by the rational will and
intelligence, he imposes an arbitrary restriction both in extent and in kind on his self-development, self-expression,
knowledge, action, Ananda. The other parts of his being demand too a complete expression in the largeness and
perfection of the self and cannot have it if their expression is changed in kind and carved, cut down and
arbitrarily shaped and mechanised in action by the inflexible machinery of the rational intelligence. The godhead
of the reason, the intellectual Logos, is only a partial representative and substitute for the greater supramental
Logos, and its function is to impose a preliminary partial knowledge and order upon the life of the creature, but
the real, final and integral order can only be founded by the spiritual supermind in its emergence.
\par The supermind in the lower nature is present most strongly as intuition and it is therefore by a development
of an intuitive mind that we can make the first step towards the self-existent spontaneous and direct supramental
knowledge. All the physical, vital, emotional, psychic, dynamic nature of man is a surface seizing of suggestions
which rise out of a subliminal intuitive self-being of these parts, and an attempt usually groping and often
circuitous to work them out in the action of a superficial
Page 796

embodiment and power of the nature which is not overtly enlightened by the inner power and knowledge. An
increasingly intuitive mind has the best chance of discovering what they are seeking for and leading them to the
desired perfection of their self-expression. The reason itself is only a special kind of application, made by a
surface regulating intelligence, of suggestions which actually come from a concealed, but sometimes partially
overt and active power of the intuitive spirit. In all its action there is at the covered or half-covered point of
origination something which is not the creation of the reason, but given to it either directly by the intuition or
indirectly through some other part of the mind for it to shape into intellectual form and process. The rational
judgment in its decisions and the mechanical process of the logical intelligence, whether in its more summary or
in its more developed operations, conceals while it develops the true origin and native substance of our will and
thinking. The greatest minds are those in which this veil wears thin and there is the largest part of intuitive
thinking, which often no doubt but not always brings with it a great accompanying display of intellectual action.
The intuitive intelligence is however never quite pure and complete in the present mind of man, because it works
in the medium of mind and is at once seized on and coated over with a mixed stuff of mentality. It is as yet not
brought out, not developed and perfected so as to be sufficient for all the operations now performed by the other
mental instruments, not trained to take them up and change them into or replace them by its own fullest, most
direct, assured and sufficient workings. This can indeed only be done if we make the intuitive mind a transitional
means for bringing out the secret supermind itself of which it is a mental figure and forming in our frontal
consciousness a body and instrument of supermind which will make it possible for the self and spirit to display
itself in its own largeness and splendour.
\par It must be remembered that there is always a difference between the supreme Supermind of the omniscient
and omnipotent Ishwara and that which can be attained by the Jiva. The human being is climbing out of the
ignorance and when he ascends into
Page 797

the supramental nature, he will find in it grades of its ascension, and he must first form the lower grades and
limited steps before he rises to higher summits. He will enjoy there the full essential light, power, Ananda of the
infinite self by oneness with the Spirit, but in the dynamical expression it must determine and individualise itself
according to the nature of the self-expression which the transcendent and universal Spirit seeks in the Jiva. It is
God-realisation and God-expression which is the object of our Yoga and more especially of its dynamic side, it is
a divine self-expression in us of the Ishwara, but under the conditions of humanity and through the divinised
human nature.
Page 798

\par
\hn Chapter XX
\par
\ht The Intuitive Mind
\par\drop The original nature of supermind is the self-conscience and all-conscience of the Infinite, of the
universal Spirit and Self in things, organising on the foundation and according to the character of a direct
self-knowledge its own wisdom and effective omnipotence for the unfolding and the regulated action of the
universe and of all things in the universe. It is, we might say, the gnosis of the Spirit master of its own cosmos,
\sforced{\=atm\=a j\~n\=at\=a \=i\'svara\,h}. As it knows itself, so too it knows all things—for all are only becomings of
itself—directly, totally and from within outward, spontaneously in detail and arrangement, each thing in the truth
of itself and its nature and in its relation to all other things. And it knows similarly all action of its energy in
antecedent or cause and occasion of manifestation and effect or consequence, all things in infinite and in limited
potentiality and in selection of actuality and in their succession of past, present and future. The organising
supermind of a divine being in the universe would be a delegation of this omnipotence and omniscience for the
purpose and within the scope of his own action and nature and of all that comes into its province. The supermind
in an individual would be a similar delegation on whatever scale and within whatever province. But while in the
god this would be a direct and an immediate delegation of a power illimitable in itself and limited only in action,
but otherwise unaltered in operation, natural to the being and full and free always, in man any emergence of the
supermind must be a gradual and at first an imperfect creation and to his customary mind the activity of an
exceptional and supernormal will and knowledge.
\par In the first place it will not be for him a native power always enjoyed without interruption, but a secret
potentiality which has to be discovered and one for which there are no organs in his
Page 799

present physical or mental system: he has either to evolve a new organ for it or else to adopt or transform
existing ones and make them utilisable for the purpose. He has not merely to uncover the hidden sun of the
supermind in the subliminal cavern of his secret being or remove the cloud of his mental ignorance from its face
in the spiritual skies so that it shall at once shine out in all its glory. His task is much more complex and difficult
because he is an evolutionary being and by the evolution of Nature of which he is a part he has been constituted
with an inferior kind of knowledge, and this inferior, this mental power of knowledge forms by its persistent
customary action an obstacle to a new formation greater than its own nature. A limited mental intelligence
enlightening a limited mind of sense and the capacity not always well used of a considerable extension of it by
the use of the reason are the powers by which he is at present distinguished from all other terrestrial creatures.
This sense mind, this intelligence, this reason, however inadequate, are the instruments in which he has learned to
put his trust and he has erected by their means certain foundations which he is not over willing to disturb and has
traced limits outside of which he feels all to be confusion, uncertainty and a perilous adventure. Moreover the
transition to the higher principle means not only a difficult conversion of his whole mind and reason and
intelligence, but in a certain sense a reversal of all their methods. The soul climbing above a certain critical line of
change sees all its former operations as an inferior and ignorant action and has to effect another kind of working
which sets out from a different starting-point and has quite another kind of initiation of the energy of the being. If
an animal mind were called upon to leave consciently the safe ground of sense impulse, sense understanding and
instinct for the perilous adventure of a reasoning intelligence, it might well turn back alarmed and unwilling from
the effort. The human mind would here be called upon to make a still greater change and, although
self-conscious and adventurous in the circle of its possibility, might well hold this to be beyond the circle and
reject the adventure. In fact the change is only possible if there is first a spiritual development on our present
level of consciousness and
Page 800

it can only be undertaken securely when the mind has become aware of the greater self within, enamoured of
the Infinite and confident of the presence and guidance of the Divine and his Shakti.
\par The problem of this conversion resolves itself at first into a passage through a mediary status and by the help
of the one power already at work in the human mind which we can recognise as something supramental in its
nature or at least in its origin, the faculty of intuition, a power of which we can feel the presence and the
workings and are impressed, when it acts, by its superior efficiency, light, direct inspiration and force, but cannot
understand or analyse it as we understand or analyse the workings of our reason. The reason understands itself,
but not what is beyond it,—of that it can only make a general figure or representation; the supermind alone can
discern the method of its own workings. The power of intuition acts in us at present for the most part in a covert
manner secret and involved in or mostly veiled by the action of the reason and the normal intelligence; so far as it
emerges into a clear separate action, it is still occasional, partial, fragmentary and of an intermittent character. It
casts a sudden light, it makes a luminous suggestion or it throws out a solitary brilliant clue or scatters a small
number of isolated or related intuitions, lustrous discriminations, inspirations or revelations, and it leaves the
reason, will, mental sense or intelligence to do what each can or pleases with this seed of succour that has come
to them from the depths or the heights of our being. The mental powers immediately proceed to lay hold on these
things and to manipulate and utilise them for our mental or vital purposes, to adapt them to the forms of the
inferior knowledge, to coat them up in or infiltrate them with the mental stuff and suggestion, often altering their
truth in the process and always limiting their potential force of enlightenment by these accretions and by this
subdual to the exigencies of the inferior agent, and almost always they make at once too little and too much of
them, too little by not allowing them time to settle and extend their full power for illumination, too much by
insisting on them or rather on the form into which the mentality casts
Page 801

them to the exclusion of the larger truth that the more consistent use of the intuitive faculty might have given.
Thus the intuition intervening in the ordinary mental operations acts in lightning flashes that make lustrous a space
of truth, but is not a steady sunlight illumining securely the whole reach and kingdom of our thought and will and
feeling and action.
\par It appears at once that there are two necessary lines of progress which we must follow, and the first is to
extend the action of the intuition and make it more constant, more persistent and regular and all-embracing until it
is so intimate and normal to our being that it can take up all the action now done by the ordinary mind and
assume its place in the whole system. This cannot wholly be done so long as the ordinary mind continues to
assert its power of independent action and intervention or its habit of seizing on the light of the intuition and
manipulating it for its own purposes. The higher mentality cannot be complete or secure so long as the inferior
intelligence is able to deform it or even to bring in any of its own intermixture. And either then we must silence
altogether the intellect and the intellectual will and the other inferior activities and leave room only for the intuitive
action or we must lay hold on and transform the lower action by the constant pressure of the intuition. Or else
there must be an alternation and combination of the two methods if that be the most natural way or at all
possible. The actual process and experience of Yoga manifests the possibility of several methods or movements
none of which by itself produces the entire result in practice, however it may seem at first sight that logically
each should or might be adequate. And when we learn to insist on no particular method as exclusively the right
one and leave the whole movement to a greater guidance, we find that the divine Lord of the Yoga commissions
his Shakti to use one or the other at different times and all in combination according to the need and turn of the
being and the nature.
\par At first it might seem the straight and right way to silence the mind altogether, to silence the intellect, the
mental and personal will, the desire mind and the mind of emotion and sensation, and to allow in that perfect
silence the Self, the Spirit, the Divine
Page 802

to disclose himself and leave him to illuminate the being by the supramental light and power and Ananda. And
this is indeed a great and powerful discipline. It is the calm and still mind much more readily and with a much
greater purity than the mind in agitation and action that opens to the Infinite, reflects the Spirit, becomes full of
the Self and awaits like a consecrated and purified temple the unveiling of the Lord of all our being and nature. It
is true also that the freedom of this silence gives a possibility of a larger play of the intuitive being and admits
with less obstruction and turmoil of mental groping and seizing the great intuitions, inspirations, revelations which
emerge from within or descend from above. It is therefore an immense gain if we can acquire the capacity of
always being able at will to command an absolute tranquillity and silence of the mind free from any necessity of
mental thought or movement and disturbance and, based in that silence, allow thought and will and feeling to
happen in us only when the Shakti wills it and when it is needful for the divine purpose. It becomes easier then to
change the manner and character of the thought and will and feeling. Nevertheless it is not the fact that by this
method the supramental light will immediately replace the lower mind and reflective reason. When the inner
action proceeds after the silence, even if it be then a more predominatingly intuitive thought and movement, the
old powers will yet interfere, if not from within, then by a hundred suggestions from without, and an inferior
mentality will mix in, will question or obstruct or will try to lay hold on the greater movement and to lower or
darken or distort or minimise it in the process. Therefore the necessity of a process of elimination or
transformation of the inferior mentality remains always imperative,—or perhaps both at once, an elimination of all
that is native to the lower being, its disfiguring accidents, its depreciations of value, its distortions of substance
and all else that the greater truth cannot harbour, and a transformation of the essential things our mind derives
from the supermind and spirit but represents in the manner of the mental ignorance.
\par A second movement is one which comes naturally to those who commence the Yoga with the initiative that
is proper to
Page 803

the way of Bhakti. It is natural to them to reject the intellect and its action and to listen for the voice, wait for the
impulsion or the command, the \s{\=ade\'sa}, obey only the idea and will and power of the Lord within them, the
divine Self and Purusha in the heart of the creature, \s{\=i\'svara\,h sarvabh\=ut\=an\=a\.m h\,rdde\'se}. This is a movement
which must tend more and more to intuitivise the whole nature, for the ideas, the will, the impulsions, the feelings
which come from the secret Purusha in the heart are of the direct intuitive character. This method is consonant
with a certain truth of our nature. The secret Self within us is an intuitive self and this intuitive self is seated in
every centre of our being, the physical, the nervous, the emotional, the volitional, the conceptual or cognitive and
the higher more directly spiritual centres. And in each part of our being it exercises a secret intuitive initiation of
our activities which is received and represented imperfectly by our outer mind and converted into the movements
of the ignorance in the external action of these parts of our nature. The heart or emotional centre of the thinking
desire mind is the strongest in the ordinary man, gathers up or at least affects the presentation of things to the
consciousness and is the capital of the system. It is from there that the Lord seated in the heart of all creatures
turns them mounted on the machine of Nature by the Maya of the mental ignorance. It is possible then by
referring back all the initiation of our action to this secret intuitive Self and Spirit, the ever-present Godhead
within us, and replacing by its influences the initiations of our personal and mental nature to get back from the
inferior external thought and action to another, internal and intuitive, of a highly spiritualised character.
Nevertheless the result of this movement cannot be complete, because the heart is not the highest centre of our
being, is not supramental nor directly moved from the supramental sources. An intuitive thought and action
directed from it may be very luminous and intense but is likely to be limited, even narrow in its intensity, mixed
with a lower emotional action and at the best excited and troubled, rendered unbalanced or exaggerated by a
miraculous or abnormal character in its action or at least in many of its accompaniments which is injurious to the
harmonised perfection
Page 804

of the being. The aim of our effort at perfection must be to make the spiritual and supramental action no longer a
miracle, even if a frequent or constant miracle, or only a luminous intervention of a greater than our natural
power, but normal to the being and the very nature and law of all its process.
\par The highest organised centre of our embodied being and of its action in the body is the supreme mental
centre figured by the yogic symbol of the thousand-petalled lotus, \s{sahasradala}, and it is at its top and summit
that there is the direct communication with the supramental levels. It is then possible to adopt a different and a
more direct method, not to refer all our thought and action to the Lord secret in the heart-lotus but to the veiled
truth of the Divinity above the mind and to receive all by a sort of descent from above, a descent of which we
become not only spiritually but physically conscious. The siddhi or full accomplishment of this movement can only
come when we are able to lift the centre of thought and conscious action above the physical brain and feel it
going on in the subtle body. If we can feel ourselves thinking no longer with the brain but from above and outside
the head in the subtle body, that is a sure physical sign of a release from the limitations of the physical mind, and
though this will not be complete at once nor of itself bring the supramental action, for the subtle body is mental
and not supramental, still it is a subtle and pure mentality and makes an easier communication with the
supramental centres. The lower movements must still come, but it is then found easier to arrive at a swift and
subtle discrimination telling us at once the difference, distinguishing the intuitional thought from the lower
intellectual mixture, separating it from its mental coatings, rejecting the mere rapidities of the mind which imitate
the form of the intuition without being of its true substance. It will be easier to discern rapidly the higher planes of
the true supramental being and call down their power to effect the desired transformation and to refer all the
lower action to the superior power and light that it may reject and eliminate, purify and transform and select
among them its right material for the Truth that has to be organised within us. This opening up of a higher level
and of
Page 805

higher and higher planes of it and the consequent re-formation of our whole consciousness and its action into
their mould and into the substance of their power and luminous capacity is found in practice to be the greater part
of the natural method used by the divine Shakti.
\par A fourth method is one which suggests itself naturally to the developed intelligence and suits the thinking
man. This is to develop our intellect instead of eliminating it, but with the will not to cherish its limitations, but to
heighten its capacity, light, intensity, degree and force of activity until it borders on the thing that transcends it and
can easily be taken up and transformed into that higher conscious action. This movement also is founded on the
truth of our nature and enters into the course and movement of the complete Yoga of self-perfection. That
course, as I have described it, included a heightening and greatening of the action of our natural instruments and
powers till they constitute in their purity and essential completeness a preparatory perfection of the present
normal movement of the Shakti that acts in us. The reason and intelligent will, the buddhi, is the greatest of these
powers and instruments, the natural leader of the rest in the developed human being, the most capable of aiding
the development of the others. The ordinary activities of our nature are all of them of use for the greater
perfection we seek, are meant to be turned into material for them, and the greater their development, the richer
the preparation for the supramental action.
\par The intellectual being too has to be taken up by the Shakti in the Yoga and raised to its fullest and its most
heightened powers. The subsequent transformation of the intellect is possible because all the action of the
intellect derives secretly from the supermind, each thought and will contains some truth of it however limited and
altered by the inferior action of the intelligence. The transformation can be brought about by the removal of the
limitation and the elimination of the distorting or perverting element. This however cannot be done by the
heightening and greatening of the intellectual activity alone; for that must always be limited by the original
inherent defects of the
Page 806

mental intelligence. An intervention of the supramental energy is needed that can light up and get rid of its
deficiencies of thought and will and feeling. This intervention too cannot be completely effective unless the
supramental plane is manifested and acts above the mind no longer from behind a lid or veil, however thin the veil
may have grown, but more constantly in an open and luminous action till there is seen the full sun of Truth with
no cloud to moderate its splendour. It is not necessary, either, to develop the intellect fully in its separateness
before calling down this intervention or opening up by it the supramental levels. The intervention may come in
earlier and at once develop the intellectual action and turn it, as it develops, into the higher intuitive form and
substance.
\par The widest natural action of the Shakti combines all these methods. It creates, sometimes at first, sometimes
at some later, perhaps latest stage, the freedom of the spiritual silence. It opens the secret intuitive being within
the mind itself and accustoms us to refer all our thought and our feeling and will and action to the initiation of the
Divine, the Splendour and Power who is now concealed in the heart of its recesses. It raises, when we are
ready, the centre of its operations to the mental summit and opens up the supramental levels and proceeds doubly
by an action from above downward filling and transforming the lower nature and an action from below upwards
raising all the energies to that which is above them till the transcendence is completed and the change of the
whole system integrally effected. It takes and develops the intelligence and will and other natural powers, but
brings in constantly the intuitive mind and afterwards the true supramental energy to change and enlarge their
action. These things it does in no fixed and mechanically invariable order, such as the rigidity of the logical
intellect might demand, but freely and flexibly according to the needs of its work and the demand of the nature.
\par The first result will not be the creation of the true supermind, but the organisation of a predominantly or even
a completely intuitive mentality sufficiently developed to take the place of the ordinary mentality and of the
logical reasoning intellect of the
Page 807

developed human being. The most prominent change will be the transmutation of the thought heightened and
filled by that substance of concentrated light, concentrated power, concentrated joy of the light and the power
and that direct accuracy which are the marks of a true intuitive thinking. It is not only primary suggestions or
rapid conclusions that this mind will give, but it will conduct too with the same light, power, joy of sureness and
direct spontaneous seeing of the truth the connecting and developing operations now conducted by the intellectual
reason. The will also will be changed into this intuitive character, proceed directly with light and power to the
thing to be done, \s{kartavya\.m karma}, and dispose with a rapid sight of possibilities and actualities the
combinations necessary to its action and its purpose. The feelings also will be intuitive, seizing upon right
relations, acting with a new light and power and a glad sureness, retaining only right and spontaneous desires and
emotions, so long as these things endure, and, when they pass away, replacing them by a luminous and
spontaneous love and an Ananda that knows and seizes at once on the right \s{rasa} of its objects. All the other
mental movements will be similarly enlightened and even too the pranic and sense movements and the
consciousness of the body. And usually there will be some development also of the psychic faculties, powers and
perceptions of the inner mind and its senses not dependent on the outer sense and the reason. The intuitive
mentality will be not only a stronger and a more luminous thing, but usually capable of a much more extensive
operation than the ordinary mind of the same man before this development of the Yoga.
\par This intuitive mentality, if it could be made perfect in its nature, unmixed with any inferior element and yet
unconscious of its own limitations and of the greatness of the thing beyond it, might form another definite status
and halting place like the instinctive mind of the animal or the reasoning mind of man. But the intuitive mentality
cannot be made abidingly perfect and self-sufficient except by the opening power of the supermind above it and
that at once reveals its limitations and makes of it a secondary action transitional between the intellectual mind
Page 808

and the true supramental nature. The intuitive mentality is still mind and not gnosis. It is indeed a light from the
supermind, but modified and diminished by the stuff of mind in which it works, and stuff of mind means always a
basis of ignorance. The intuitive mind is not yet the wide sunlight of truth, but a constant play of flashes of it
keeping lighted up a basic state of ignorance or of half-knowledge and indirect knowledge. As long as it is
imperfect, it is invaded by a mixture of ignorant mentality which crosses its truth with a strain of error. After it
has acquired a larger native action more free from this intermixture, even then so long as the stuff of mind in
which it works is capable of the old intellectual or lower mental habit, it is subject to accretion of error, to
clouding, to many kinds of relapse. Moreover the individual mind does not live alone and to itself but in the
general mind and all that it has rejected is discharged into the general mind atmosphere around it and tends to
return upon and invade it with the old suggestions and many promptings of the old mental character. The intuitive
mind, growing or grown, has therefore to be constantly on guard against invasion and accretion, on the watch to
reject and eliminate immixtures, busy intuitivising more and still more the whole stuff of mind, and this can only
end by itself being enlightened, transformed, lifted up into the full light of the supramental being.
\par Moreover, this new mentality is in each man a development of the present power of his being and, however
new and remarkable its developments, its organisation is within a certain range of capacity. Adventuring beyond
that border—it may indeed limit itself to the work in hand and its present range of realised capacity, but the
nature of a mind opened to the infinite is to progress and change and enlarge—it there becomes liable to a return,
however modified by the new intuitive habit, of the old intellectual seeking in the ignorance,—unless and until it is
constantly overtopped and led by the manifested action of a fuller supramental luminous energy. This is indeed its
nature that it is a link and transition between present mind and the supermind and, so long as the transition is not
complete, there is sometimes a gravitation downward, sometimes a tendency
Page 809

upward, an oscillation, an invasion and attraction from below, an invasion and attraction from above, and at best
an uncertain and limited status between the two poles. As the higher intelligence of man is situated between his
animal and customary human mind below and his evolving spiritual mind above, so this first spiritual mind is
situated between the intellectualised human mentality and the greater supramental knowledge.
\par The nature of mind is that it lives between half-lights and darkness, amid probabilities and possibilities, amid
partly grasped aspects, amid incertitudes and half certitudes: it is an ignorance grasping at knowledge, striving to
enlarge itself and pressing against the concealed body of true gnosis. The supermind lives in the light of spiritual
certitudes: it is to man knowledge opening the actual body of its own native effulgence. The intuitive mind
appears at first a lightening up of the mind's half-lights, its probabilities and possibilities, its aspects, its uncertain
certitudes, its representations, and a revealing of the truth concealed or half concealed and half manifested by
these things, and in its higher action it is a first bringing of the supramental truth by a nearer directness of seeing,
a luminous indication or memory of the spirit's knowledge, an intuition or looking in through the gates of the
being's secret universal self-vision and knowledge. It is a first imperfect organisation of that greater light and
power, imperfect because done in the mind, not based on its own native substance of consciousness, a constant
communication, but not a quite immediate and constant presence. The perfect perfection lies beyond on the
supramental levels and must be based on a more decisive and complete transformation of the mentality and of
our whole nature.
Page 810

\par
\hn Chapter XXI
\par
\ht The Gradations of the Supermind
\par\drop The intuitive mind is an immediate translation of truth into mental terms half transformed by a radiant
supramental substance, a translation of some infinite self-knowledge that acts above mind in the superconscient
spirit. That spirit becomes conscient to us as a greater self at once above and in and around us of which our
present self, our mental, vital and physical personality and nature, is an imperfect portion or a partial derivation or
an inferior and inadequate symbol, and as the intuitive mind grows in us, as our whole being grows more moulded
to an intuitive substance, we feel a sort of half transformation of our members into the nature of this greater self
and spirit. All our thought, will, impulse, feeling, even in the end our more outward vital and physical sensations
become more and more direct transmissions from the spirit and are of another and a more and more pure,
untroubled, powerful and luminous nature. This is one side of the change: the other is that whatever belongs still
to the lower being, whatever still seems to us to come from outside or as a survival of the action of our old
inferior personality, feels the pressure of the change and increasingly tends to modify and transform itself to the
new substance and nature. The higher comes down and largely takes the place of the lower, but also the lower
changes, transforms itself into material of the action and becomes part of the substance of the higher being.
\par The greater spirit above the mind appears at first as a presence, a light, a power, a source, an infinite, but all
that is knowable to us in it is at first an infinite identity of being, consciousness, power of consciousness, Ananda.
The rest comes from it, but takes no determinate shape of thought, will or feeling above us, but only in the
intuitive mind and on its level. Or we feel and are manifoldly aware of a great and infinite Purusha who
Page 811

is the eternally living truth of that being and presence, a great and infinite knowledge which is the potency of that
light and consciousness, a great and infinite will which is the potency of that power of consciousness, a great and
infinite love which is the potency of that Ananda. But all these potencies are only known to us in any definite
manner, apart from the strong reality and effect of their essential presence, in so far as they are translated to our
intuitive mental being and on its level and within its limits. As however we progress or as we grow into a more
luminous and dynamic union with that spirit or Purusha, a greater action of knowledge and will and spiritual
feeling manifests and seems to organise itself above the mind and this we recognise as the true supermind and
the real native play of the infinite knowledge, will and Ananda. The intuitive mentality then becomes a secondary
and inferior movement waiting upon this higher power, responding and assenting to all its illuminations and
dictates, transmitting them to the lower members, and, when they do not arrive or are not in immediate evidence,
often attempting to supply its place, imitate its action and do as best it can the works of the supramental nature. It
takes in fact the same place and relation with regard to it as was taken with regard to itself by the ordinary
intelligence at an earlier stage of the Yoga.
\par This double action on the two planes of our being at first strengthens the intuitive mentality as a secondary
operation and assists it to expel or transform more completely the survivals or invasions or accretions of the
ignorance. And more and more it intensifies the intuitive mentality itself in its light of knowledge and eventually
transforms it into the image of the supermind itself, but at first, ordinarily, in the more limited action of the gnosis
when it takes the form of what we might call a luminous supramental or divine reason. It is as this divine reason
that the supermind itself at the beginning may manifest its action and then, when it has changed the mind into its
own image, it descends and takes the place of the ordinary intelligence and reason. Meanwhile a higher
supramental power of a much greater character has been revealing itself above which takes the supreme lead of
the divine action in the being. The divine
Page 812

reason is of a more limited character because, although not of the mental stamp and although an operation of the
direct truth and knowledge, it is a delegated power for a range of purposes greater in light, but still to a certain
extent analogous to those of the ordinary human will and reason; it is in the yet greater supermind that there
comes the direct, altogether revealed and immediate action of the Ishwara in the human being. These distinctions
between the intuitive mind, the divine reason and the greater supermind, and others within these gradations
themselves, have to be made because eventually they become of great importance. At first the mind takes all
that comes from beyond it without distinction as the sufficient spiritual illumination and accepts even initial states
and first enlightenments as a finality, but afterwards it finds that to rest here would be to rest in a partial
realisation and that one has to go on heightening and enlarging till at least there is reached a certain completeness
of divine breadth and stature.
\par It is difficult for the intellect to grasp at all what is meant by these supramental distinctions: the mental terms
in which they can be rendered are lacking or inadequate and they can only be understood after a certain sight or
certain approximations in experience. A number of indications are all that at present it can be useful to give. And
first it will be enough to take certain clues from the thinking mind; for it is there that some of the nearest keys to
the supramental action are discoverable. The thought of the intuitive mind proceeds wholly by four powers that
shape the form of the truth, an intuition that suggests its idea, an intuition that discriminates, an inspiration that
brings in its word and something of its greater substance and a revelation that shapes to the sight its very face
and body of reality. These things are not the same as certain movements of the ordinary mental intelligence that
look analogous and are easily mistaken for the true intuition in our first inexperience. The suggestive intuition is
not the same thing as the intellectual insight of a quick intelligence or the intuitive discrimination as the rapid
judgment of the reasoning intellect; the intuitive inspiration is not the same as the inspired action of the
imaginative \NH intelligence, nor
Page 813

the intuitive revelation as the strong light of a purely mental close seizing and experience.
\par It would perhaps be accurate to say that these latter activities are mental representations of the higher
movements, attempts of the ordinary mind to do the same things or the best possible imitations the intellect can
offer of the functionings of the higher nature. The true intuitions differ from these effective but insufficient
counterfeits in their substance of light, their operation, their method of knowledge. The intellectual rapidities are
dependent on awakenings of the basic mental ignorance to mental figures and representations of truth that may
be quite valid in their own field and for their own purpose but are not necessarily and by their very nature
reliable. They are dependent for their emergence on the suggestions given by mental and sense data or on the
accumulation of past mental knowledge. They search for the truth as a thing outside, an object to be found and
looked at and stored as an acquisition and, when found, scrutinise its surfaces, suggestions or aspects. This
scrutiny can never give a quite complete and adequate truth idea. However positive they may seem at the time,
they may at any moment have to be passed over, rejected and found inconsistent with fresh knowledge.
\par The intuitive knowledge on the contrary, however limited it may be in its field or application, is within that
scope sure with an immediate, a durable and especially a self-existent certitude. It may take for starting-point or
rather for a thing to light up and disclose in its true sense the data of mind and sense or else fire a train of past
thought and knowledge to new meanings and issues, but it is dependent on nothing but itself and may leap out of
its own field of lustres, independent of previous suggestion or data, and this kind of action becomes progressively
more common and adds itself to the other to initiate new depths and ranges of knowledge. In either case there is
always an element of self-existent truth and a sense of absoluteness of origination suggestive of its proceeding
from the spirit's knowledge by identity. It is the disclosing of a knowledge that is secret but already existent in the
being: it is not an acquisition, but something that was always there and revealable. It sees the truth from
Page 814

within and illumines with that inner vision the outsides and it harmonises, too, readily—provided we keep
intuitively awake—with whatever fresh truth has yet to arrive. These characteristics become more pronounced
and intense in the higher, the proper supramental ranges: in the intuitive mind they may not be always
recognisable in their purity and completeness, because of the mixture of mental stuff and its accretion, but in the
divine reason and greater supramental action they become free and absolute.
\par The suggestive intuition acting on the mental level suggests a direct and illumining inner idea of the truth, an
idea that is its true image and index, not as yet the entirely present and whole sight, but rather of the nature of a
bright memory of some truth, a recognition of a secret of the self's knowledge. It is a representation, but a living
representation, not an ideative symbol, a reflection, but a reflection that is lit up with something of the truth's real
substance. The intuitive discrimination is a secondary action setting this idea of the truth in its right place and its
relation to other ideas. And so long as there is the habit of mental interference and accretion it works also to
separate the mental from the higher seeing, to discrete the inferior mental stuff that embarrasses with its alloy
the pure truth substance, and labours to unravel the mingled skein of ignorance and knowledge, falsehood and
error. As the intuition is of the nature of a memory, a luminous remembering of the self-existent truth, so the
inspiration is of the nature of truth hearing: it is an immediate reception of the very voice of the truth, it readily
brings the word that perfectly embodies it and it carries something more than the light of its idea; there is seized
some stream of its inner reality and vivid arriving movement of its substance. The revelation is of the nature of
direct sight, \s{pratyak\,sa-d\,r\,s\,ti}, and makes evident to a present vision the thing in itself of which the idea is the
representation. It brings out the very spirit and being and reality of the truth and makes it part of the
consciousness and the experience.
\par In the actual process of the development of the supramental nature, supposing it to follow a regular
gradation, it may be seen
Page 815

that the two lower powers come out first, though not necessarily void of all action of the two higher powers, and
as they increase and become a normal action, they make a sort of lower intuitive gnosis. The combination of the
two together is necessary for its completeness. If the intuitive discrimination works by itself, it creates a sort of
critical illumination that acts on the ideas and perceptions of the intellect and turns them on themselves in such a
way that the mind can separate their truth from their error. It creates in the end in place of the intellectual
judgment a luminous intuitive judgment, a sort of critical gnosis: but it is likely to be deficient in fresh illuminative
knowledge or to create only so much extension of truth as is the natural consequence of the separation of error.
On the other hand, if the suggestive intuition works by itself without this discrimination, there is indeed a constant
accession of new truths and new lights, but they are easily surrounded and embarrassed by the mental accretions
and their connections and relation or harmonious development out of each other are clouded and broken by the
interference. A normalised power of active intuitive perception is created, but not any complete and coherent
mind of intuitive gnosis. The two together supply the deficiencies of each other's single action and build up a mind
of intuitive perception and discrimination which can do the work and more than the work of the stumbling mental
intelligence and do it with the greater light, surety and power of a more direct and unfaltering ideation.
\par The two higher powers in the same way make a higher intuitive gnosis. Acting as separate powers in the
mentality they too are not in themselves sufficient without the companion activities. The revelation may indeed
present the reality, the identities of the thing in itself and add something of great power to the experience of the
conscious being, but it may lack the embodying word, the out-bringing idea, the connected pursuit of its relations
and consequences and may remain a possession in the self but not a thing communicated to and through the
members. There may be the presence of the truth but not its full manifestation. The inspiration may give the
word of the truth and the stir of its dynamis and movement, but this is not a complete thing and sure
Page 816

in its effect without the full revelation of all that it bears in itself and luminously indicates and the ordering of it in
its relations. The inspired intuitive mind is a mind of lightnings lighting up many things that were dark, but the light
needs to be canalised and fixed into a stream of steady lustres that will be a constant power for lucidly ordered
knowledge. The higher gnosis by itself in its two sole powers would be a mind of spiritual splendours living too
much in its own separate domain, producing perhaps invisibly its effect on the outside world, but lacking the link
of a more close and ordinary communication with its more normal movements that is provided by the lower
ideative action. It is the united or else the fused and unified action of the four powers that makes the complete
and fully armed and equipped intuitive gnosis.
\par A regular development would at first, allowing for some simultaneous manifestation of the four powers, yet
create on a sufficiently extensive scale the lower suggestive and critical intuitive mind and then develop above it
the inspired and the revelatory intuitive mentality. Next it would take up the two lower powers into the power and
field of the inspiration and make all act as one harmony doing simultaneously the united—or, at a higher intensity,
indistinguishably as one light the unified—action of the three. And last it would execute a similar movement of
taking up into and fusion with the revelatory power of the intuitive gnosis. As a matter of fact in the human mind
the clear process of the development is likely always to be more or less disturbed, confused and rendered
irregular in its course, subjected to relapses, incomplete advances, returns upon things unaccomplished or
imperfectly accomplished owing to the constant mixture and intervention of the existing movements of the mental
half-knowledge and the obstruction of the stuff of the mental ignorance. In the end however a time can come
when the process, so far as it is possible in the mind itself, is complete and a clear formation of a modified
supramental light is possible composed of all these powers, the highest leading or absorbing into its own body the
others. It is at this point, when the intuitive mind has been fully formed in the mental being and
Page 817

is strong enough to dominate if not yet wholly to occupy the various mental activities, that a farther step becomes
possible, the lifting of the centre and level of action above the mind and the predominance of the supramental
reason.
\par The first character of this change is a complete reversal, a turning over, one might almost say, upside down
of the whole activity. At present we live in the mind and mostly in the physical mind, but still not entirely involved
like the animal in the physical, vital and sensational workings. On the contrary we have attained to a certain
mental elevation from which we can look down on the action of the life, sense and body, turn the higher mental
light on them, reflect, judge, use our will to modify the action of the inferior nature. On the other hand we look up
too from that elevation more or less consciously to something above and receive from it either directly or through
our subconscient or subliminal being some secret superconscient impulsion of our thought and will and other
activities. The process of this communication is veiled and obscure and men are not ordinarily aware of it except
in certain highly developed natures: but when we advance in self-knowledge, we find that all our thought and will
originate from above though formed in the mind and there first overtly active. If we release the knots of the
physical mind which binds us to the brain instrument and identifies us with the bodily consciousness and can
move in the pure mentality, this becomes constantly clear to the perception.
\par The development of the intuitive mentality makes this communication direct, no longer subconscient and
obscure; but we are still in the mind and the mind still looks upward and receives the supramental communication
and passes it on to the other members. In doing so it no longer wholly creates its own form for the thought and
will that come down to it, but still it modifies and qualifies and limits them and imposes something of its own
method. It is still the receiver and the transmitter of the thought and will,—though not formative of them now
except by a subtle influence, because it provides them or at least surrounds them with a mental stuff or a mental
setting and framework and atmosphere. When however the supramental reason develops,
Page 818

the Purusha rises above the mental elevation and now looks down on the whole action of mind, life, sense, body
from quite another light and atmosphere, sees and knows it with quite a different vision and, because he is no
longer involved in the mind, with a free and true knowledge. Man is at present only partly liberated from the
animal involution,—for his mind is partially lifted above, partially immerged and controlled by the life, sense and
body,—and he is not at all liberated from the mental forms and limits. But after he rises to the supramental
elevation, he is delivered from the nether control and governor of his whole nature—essentially and initially only
at first and in his highest consciousness, for the rest remains still to be transformed,—but when or in proportion
as that is done, he becomes a free being and master of his mind, sense, life and body.
\par The second character of the change is that the formation of the thought and will can take place now wholly
on the supramental level and therefore there is initiated an entirely luminous and effective will and knowledge.
The light and the power are not indeed complete at the beginning because the supramental reason is only an
elementary formulation of the supermind and because the mind and other members have yet to be changed into
the mould of the supramental nature. The mind, it is true, no longer acts as the apparent originator, formulator or
judge of the thought and will or anything else, but it still acts as the transmitting channel and therefore in that
degree as a recipient and to a certain extent an obstructor and qualifier in transmission of the power and light that
comes from above. There is a disparateness between the supramental consciousness in which the Purusha now
stands, thinks and wills and the mental, vital and physical consciousness through which he has to effectuate its
light and knowledge. He lives and sees with an ideal consciousness, but he has yet in his lower self to make it
entirely practical and effective. Otherwise he can only act with a greater or less spiritual effectiveness through
an internal communication with others on the spiritual level and on the higher mental level that is most easily
affected by it, but the effect is diminished and is retarded by the inferiority or lack of
Page 819

the integral play of the being. This can only be remedied by the supermind taking hold of and supramentalising
the mental, the vital and the physical consciousness,—transforming them, that is to say, into moulds of the
supramental nature. This is much more easily done if there has been that Yogic preparation of the instruments of
the lower nature of which I have already spoken; otherwise there is much difficulty in getting rid of the discord
or disparateness between the ideal supramentality and the mental transmitting instruments, the mind channel, the
heart, the sense, the nervous and the physical being. The supramental reason can do the first and a fairly ample,
though not the entire work of this transformation.
\par The supramental reason is of the nature of a spiritual, direct, self-luminous, self-acting will and intelligence,
not mental, \s{m\=anasa buddhi}, but supramental, \s{vij\~n\=ana buddhi}. It acts by the same four powers as the
intuitive mind, but these powers are here active in an initial fullness of body not modified by the mental stuff of
the intelligence, not concerned mainly with an illumining of the mind, but at work in their own proper manner and
for their own native purpose. And of these four the discrimination here is hardly recognisable as a separate
power, but is constantly inherent in the three others and is their own determination of the scope and relations of
their knowledge. There are three elevations in this reason, one in which the action of what we may call a
supramental intuition gives the form and the predominant character, one in which a rapid supramental inspiration
and one in which a large supramental revelation leads and imparts the general character, and each of these
raises us to a more concentrated substance and a higher light, sufficiency and scope of the truth will and the truth
knowledge.
\par The work of the supramental reason covers and goes beyond all that is done by the mental reason, but it
starts from the other end and has a corresponding operation. The essential truths of self and the spirit and the
principle of things are not to the spiritual reason abstract ideas or subtle unsubstantial experiences to which it
arrives by a sort of overleaping of limits, but a constant reality and the natural background of all its ideation
Page 820

and experience. It does not like the mind arrive at, but discloses directly both the general and total and the
particular truths of being and consciousness, of spiritual and other sensation and Ananda and of force and
action,—reality and phenomenon and symbol, actuality and possibility and eventuality, that which is determined
and that which determines, and all with a self-luminous evidence. It formulates and arranges the relations of
thought and thought, of force and force, of action and action and of all these with each other and throws them
into a convincing and luminous harmony. It includes the data of sense, but gives to them another meaning in the
light of what is behind them, and treats them only as outermost indications: the inner truth is known to a greater
sense which it already possesses. And it is not dependent on them alone even in their own field of objects or
limited by their range. It has a spiritual sense and sensation of its own and it takes and relates to that the data too
of a sixth sense, the inner mind sense. And it takes also the illuminations and the living symbols and images
familiar to the psychic experience and relates these too to the truths of the self and spirit.
\par The spiritual reason takes also the emotions and psychic sensations, relates them to their spiritual equivalents
and imparts to them the values of the higher consciousness and Ananda from which they derive and are its
modifications in an inferior nature and it corrects their deformations. It takes similarly the movements of the vital
being and consciousness and relates them to the movements and imparts to them the significances of the spiritual
life of the self and its power of Tapas. It takes the physical consciousness, delivers it from its darkness and
tamas of inertia and makes it a responsive recipient and a sensitive instrument of the supramental light and power
and Ananda. It deals with life and action and knowledge like the mental will and reason, but not starting from
matter, life and sense and their data and relating to them through the idea the truth of higher things, but it starts
on the contrary from truth of self and spirit and relates to that through a direct spiritual experience assuming all
other experience as its forms and instruments the things of mind and soul and life and sense and matter. It
commands a far vaster
Page 821

range than the ordinary embodied mind shut up in the prison of the physical senses and vaster too than the pure
mentality, even when that is free in its own ranges and operates with the aid of the psychical mind and inner
senses. And it has that power which the mental will and reason do not possess, because they are not truly
self-determined and originally determinative of things, the power of transforming the whole being in all its parts
into a harmonious instrument and manifestation of the spirit.
\par At the same time the spiritual reason acts mainly by the representative idea and will in the spirit, though it
has a greater and more essential truth as its constant source and supporter and reference. It is, then, a power of
light of the Ishwara, but not the very self-power of his immediate presence in the being; it is his
\sforced{s\=urya-\'sakti}, not his whole \s{\=atma-\'sakti} or \sforced{par\=a sv\=a prak\,rti}, that works in the spiritual
reason. The immediate self-power begins its direct operation in the greater supermind, and that takes up all that
has hitherto been realised in body, life and mind and in the intuitive being and by the spiritual reason and shapes
all that has been created, all that has been gathered, turned into stuff of experience and made part of the
consciousness, personality and nature by the mental being, into a highest harmony with the high infinite and
universal life of the spirit. The mind can have the touch of the infinite and the universal and can reflect and even
lose itself in them, but the supermind alone can enable the individual to be completely one in action with the
universal and transcendent spirit.
\par Here the one thing that is always and constantly present, that which one has grown to and in which one lives
always, is infinite being and all that is is seen, felt, known, existed in as only substance of the one being; it is
infinite consciousness and all that is conscious and acts and moves is seen, felt, received, known, lived in as
self-experience and energy of the one being; it is infinite Ananda and all that feels and is felt is seen and felt and
known, received and lived in as forms of the one Ananda. Everything else is only manifestation and circumstance
of this one truth of our existence. This is no longer merely the seeing or knowing, but the very condition of the
self in all and all in the
Page 822

self, God in all and all in God and all seen as God, and that condition is now not a thing offered to the reflecting
spiritualised mind but held and lived by an integral, always present, always active realisation in the supramental
nature. There is thought here and will and sensation and everything that belongs to our nature, but it is
transfigured and elevated into a higher consciousness. All thought is here seen and experienced as a luminous
body of substance, a luminous movement of force, a luminous wave of Ananda of the being; it is not an idea in
the void air of mind, but experienced in the reality and as the light of a reality of the infinite being. The will and
impulsions are similarly experienced as a real power and substance of the Sat, the Chit, the Ananda of the
Ishwara. All the spiritualised sensation and emotion are experienced as pure moulds of the consciousness and
Ananda. The physical being itself is experienced as a conscious form and the vital being as an outpouring of the
power and possession of the life of the spirit.
\par The action of the supermind in the development is to manifest and organise this highest consciousness so as
to exist and act no longer only in the infinite above with some limited or veiled or lower and deformed
manifestations in the individual being and nature, but largely and totally in the individual as a conscious and
self-knowing spiritual being and a living and acting power of the infinite and universal spirit. The character of this
action, so far as it can be expressed, may be spoken of more fitly afterwards when we come to speak of the
Brahmic consciousness and vision. In the succeeding chapters we shall only deal with so much of it as concerns
the thought, will and psychic and other experience in the individual nature. At present all that is necessary to note
is that here too there is in the field of the thought and the will a triple action. The spiritual reason is lifted and
broadened into a greater representative action that formulates to us mainly the actualities of the existence of the
self in and around us. There is then a higher interpretative action of the supramental knowledge, a greater scale
less insistent on actualities, that opens out yet greater potentialities in time and space and beyond. And lastly
there is a highest knowledge by
Page 823

identity that is a gate of entrance to the essential self-awareness and the omniscience and omnipotence of the
Ishwara.
\par It must not however be supposed that these superimposed stages are shut off in experience from each
other. I have placed them in what might be a regular order of ascending development for the better possibility of
understanding in an intellectual statement. But the infinite even in the normal mind breaks through its own veils
and across its own dividing lines of descent and ascension and gives often intimations of itself in one manner or
another. And while we are still in the intuitive mentality, the things above open and come to us in irregular
visitations, then form as we grow a more frequent and regularised action above it. These anticipations are still
more large and frequent the moment we enter on the supramental level. The universal and infinite consciousness
can always seize on and surround the mind and it is when it does so with a certain continuity, frequency or
persistence that the mind can most easily transform itself into the intuitive mentality and that again into the
supramental movement. Only as we rise we grow more intimately and integrally into the infinite consciousness
and it becomes more fully our own self and nature. And also, on the other, the lower side of existence which it
might seem would then be not only beneath but quite alien to us, even when we live in the supramental being and
even when the whole nature has been formed into its mould, that need not cut us off from the knowledge and
feeling of others who live in the ordinary nature. The lower or more limited may have a difficulty in
understanding and feeling the higher, but the higher and less limited can always, if it will, understand and identify
itself with the lower nature. The supreme Ishwara too is not aloof from us; he knows, lives in, identifies himself
with all and yet is not subjugated by the reactions or limited in his knowledge, power and Ananda by the
limitations of the mind and life and physical being in the universe.
Page 824

\par
\hn Chapter XXII
\par
\ht The Supramental Thought\nl and Knowledge
\par\drop The transition from mind to supermind is not only the substitution of a greater instrument of thought and
knowledge, but a change and conversion of the whole consciousness. There is evolved not only a supramental
thought, but a supramental will, sense, feeling, a supramental substitute for all the activities that are now
accomplished by the mind. All these higher activities are first manifested in the mind itself as descents, irruptions,
messages or revelations of a superior power. Mostly they are mixed up with the more ordinary action of the mind
and not easily distinguishable from them in our first inexperience except by their superior light and force and joy,
the more so as the mind greatened or excited by their frequent coming quickens its own action and imitates the
external characteristics of the supramental activity: its own operation is made more swift, luminous, strong and
positive and it arrives even at a kind of imitative and often false intuition that strives to be but is not really the
luminous, direct and self-existent truth. The next step is the formation of a luminous mind of intuitive experience,
thought, will, feeling, sense from which the intermixture of the lesser mind and the imitative intuition are
progressively eliminated: this is a process of purification, \s{\'suddhi}, necessary to the new formation and
perfection, \s{siddhi}. At the same time there is the disclosure above the mind of the source of the intuitive
action and a more and more organised functioning of a true supramental consciousness acting not in the mind but
on its own higher plane. This draws up into itself in the end the intuitive mentality it has created as its
representative and assumes the charge of the whole activity of the consciousness. The process is progressive
and for a long time chequered by admixture and
Page 825

the necessity of a return upon the lower movements in order to correct and transform them. The higher and the
lower power act sometimes alternately,—the consciousness descending back from the heights it had attained to
its former level but always with some change,—but sometimes together and with a sort of mutual reference. The
mind eventually becomes wholly intuitivised and exists only as a passive channel for the supramental action; but
this condition too is not ideal and presents, besides, still a certain obstacle, because the higher action has still to
pass through a retarding and diminishing conscious substance,—that of the physical consciousness. The final
stage of the change will come when the supermind occupies and supramentalises the whole being and turns even
the vital and physical sheaths into moulds of itself, responsive, subtle and instinct with its powers. Man then
becomes wholly the superman. This is at least the natural and integral process.
\par It would be to go altogether outside present limits to attempt anything like an adequate presentation of the
whole character of the supermind; and it would not be possible to give a complete presentation, since the
supermind carries in it the unity, but also the largeness and multiplicities of the infinite. All that need now be done
is to present some salient characters from the point of view of the actual process of the conversion in the Yoga,
the relation to the action of mind and the principle of some of the phenomena of the change. This is the
fundamental relation that all the action of the mind is a derivation from the secret supermind, although we do not
know this until we come to know our higher self, and draws from that source all it has of truth and value. All our
thoughts, willings, feelings, sense representations have in them or at their roots an element of truth, which
originates and sustains their existence, however in the actuality they may be perverted or false, and behind them
a greater ungrasped truth, which if they could grasp it, would make them soon unified, harmonious and at least
relatively complete. Actually, however, such truth as they have is diminished in scope, degraded into a lower
movement, divided and falsified by fragmentation, afflicted with incompleteness, marred by
Page 826

perversion. Mental knowledge is not an integral but always a partial knowledge. It adds constantly detail to detail,
but has a difficulty in relating them aright; its wholes too are not real but incomplete wholes which it tends to
substitute for the more real and integral knowledge. And even if it arrived at a kind of integral knowledge, it
would still be by a sort of putting together, a mental and intellectual arrangement, an artificial unity and not an
essential and real oneness. If that were all, the mind might conceivably arrive at some kind of half reflection half
translation of an integral knowledge, but the radical malady would still be that it would not be the real thing, but
only at best an intellectual representation. That the mental truth must always be, an intellectual, emotional and
sensational representation, not the direct truth, not truth itself in its body and essence.
\par The supermind can do all that the mind does, present and combine details and what might be called aspects
or subordinate wholes, but it does it in a different way and on another basis. It does not like the mind bring in the
element of deviation, false extension and imposed error, but even when it gives a partial knowledge, gives it in a
firm and exact light, and always there is behind implied or opened to the consciousness the essential truth on
which the details and subordinate wholes or aspects depend. The supermind has also a power of representation,
but its representations are not of the intellectual kind, they are filled with the body and substance of light of the
truth in its essence, they are its vehicles and not substituted figures. There is such an infinite power of
representation of the supermind and that is the divine power of which the mental action is a sort of fallen
representative. This representative supermind has a lower action in what I have called the supramental reason,
nearest to the mental and into which the mental can most easily be taken up, and a higher action in the integral
supermind that sees all things in the unity and infinity of the divine consciousness and self-existence. But on
whatever level, it is a different thing from the corresponding mental action, direct, luminous, secure. The whole
inferiority of the mind comes from its being the action of the soul after it has fallen into the nescience and the
ignorance
Page 827

and is trying to get back to self-knowledge but doing it still on the basis of the nescience and the ignorance. The
mind is the ignorance attempting to know or it is the ignorance receiving a derivative knowledge: it is the action
of Avidya. The supermind is always the disclosure of an inherent and self-existent knowledge; it is the action of
Vidya.
\par A second difference that we experience is a greater and a spontaneous harmony and unity. All
consciousness is one, but in action it takes on many movements and each of these fundamental movements has
many forms and processes. The forms and processes of the mind consciousness are marked by a disturbing and
perplexing division and separateness of the mental energies and movements in which the original unity of the
conscious mind does not at all or only distractedly appears. Constantly we find in our mentality a conflict or else
a confusion and want of combination between different thoughts or a patched up combination and the same
phenomenon applies to the various movements of our will and desire and to our emotions and feelings. Again our
thought and our will and our feeling are not in a state of natural harmony and unison with each other, but act in
their separate power even when they have to act together and are frequently in conflict or to some degree at
variance. There is too an unequal development of one at the expense of another. The mind is a thing of discords
in which some kind of practical arrangement rather than a satisfying concord is established for the purposes of
life. The reason tries to arrive at a better arrangement, aims at a better control, a rational or an ideal harmony,
and in this attempt it is a delegate or substitute of the supermind and is trying to do what only the supermind can
do in its own right: but actually it is not able wholly to control the rest of the being and there is usually a
considerable difference between the rational or ideal harmony we create in our thoughts and the movement of
the life. Even at the best the arrangement made by the reason has always in it something of artificiality and
imposition, for in the end there are only two spontaneous harmonic movements, that of the life, inconscient or
largely subconscient, the harmony that we find in the animal creation and in lower Nature, and that of
Page 828

the spirit. The human condition is a stage of transition, effort and imperfection between the one and the other,
between the natural and the ideal or spiritual life and it is full of uncertain seeking and disorder. It is not that the
mental being cannot find or rather construct some kind of relative harmony of its own, but that it cannot render it
stable because it is under the urge of the spirit. Man is obliged by a Power within him to be the labourer of a
more or less conscious self-evolution that shall lead him to self-mastery and self-knowledge.
\par The supermind in its action is on the contrary a thing of unity and harmony and inherent order. At first when
the pressure from above falls on the mentality, this is not realised and even a contrary phenomenon may for a
time appear. That is due to several causes. First, there may be a disturbance, even a derangement created by
impact of the greater hardly measurable power on an inferior consciousness which is not capable of responding
to it organically or even perhaps of bearing the pressure. The very fact of the simultaneous and yet
uncoordinated activity of two quite different forces, especially if the mind insists on its own way, if it tries
obstinately or violently to profit by the supermind instead of giving itself up to it and its purpose, if it is not
sufficiently passive and obedient to the higher guidance, may lead to a great excitation of power but also an
increased disorder. It is for this reason that a previous preparation and long purification, the more complete the
better, and a tranquillising and ordinarily a passivity of the mind calmly and strongly open to the spirit are
necessities of the Yoga.
\par Again the mind, accustomed to act in limits, may try to supramentalise itself on the line of any one of its
energies. It may develop a considerable power of intuitive half-supramentalised thought and knowledge, but the
will may remain untransformed and out of harmony with this partial half-supramental development of the thinking
mind, and the rest of the being too, emotional and nervous, may continue to be equally or more unregenerate. Or
there may be a very great development of intuitive or strongly inspired will, but no corresponding uplifting of the
thought mind or the emotional and psychic being, or only
Page 829

at most so much as is specially needed in order not wholly to obstruct the will action. The emotional or psychic
mind may try to intuitivise and supramentalise itself and to a great extent succeed, and yet the thinking mind
remain ordinary, poor in stuff and obscure in its light. There may be a development of intuitivity in the ethical or
aesthetic being, but the rest may remain very much as it was. This is the reason of the frequent disorder or
one-sidedness which we mark in the man of genius, poet, artist, thinker, saint or mystic. A partially intuitivised
mentality may present an appearance of much less harmony and order outside its special activity than the largely
developed intellectual mind. An integral development is needed, a wholesale conversion of the mind; otherwise
the action is that of the mind using the supramental influx for its own profit and in its own mould, and that is
allowed for the immediate purpose of the Divine in the being and may even be considered as a stage sufficient
for the individual in this one life: but it is a state of imperfection and not the complete and successful evolution of
the being. If however there is an integral development of the intuitive mind, it will be found that a great harmony
has begun to lay its own foundations. This harmony will be other than that created by the intellectual mind and
indeed may not be easily perceptible or, if it is felt, yet not intelligible to the logical man, because not arrived at or
analysable by his mental process. It will be a harmony of the spontaneous expression of the spirit.
\par As soon as we arise above mind to the supermind, this initial harmony will be replaced by a greater and a
more integral unity. The thoughts of the supramental reason meet together and understand each other and fall
into a natural arrangement even when they have started from quite opposite quarters. The movements of will
that are in conflict in the mind, come in the supermind to their right place and relation to each other. The
supramental feelings also discover their own affinities and fall into a natural agreement and harmony. At a higher
stage this harmony intensifies towards unity. The knowledge, will, feeling and all else become a single movement.
This unity reaches its greatest completeness in the highest supermind. The harmony, the unity
Page 830

are inevitable because the base in the supermind is knowledge and characteristically self-knowledge, the
knowledge of the self in all its aspects. The supramental will is the dynamic expression of this self-knowledge,
the supramental feeling the expression of the luminous joy of the self and all else in supermind a part of this one
movement. At its highest range it becomes something greater than what we call knowledge; there it is the
essential and integral self-awareness of the Divine in us, his being, consciousness, Tapas, Ananda, and all is the
harmonious, unified, luminous movement of that one existence.
\par This supramental knowledge is not primarily or essentially a thought knowledge. The intellect does not
consider that it knows a thing until it has reduced its awareness of it to the terms of thought, not, that is to say,
until it has put it into a system of representative mental concepts, and this kind of knowledge gets its most
decisive completeness when it can be put into clear, precise and defining speech. It is true that the mind gets its
knowledge primarily by various kinds of impression beginning from the vital and the sense impressions and rising
to the intuitive, but these are taken by the developed intelligence only as data and seem to it uncertain and vague
in themselves until they have been forced to yield up all their content to the thought and have taken their place in
some intellectual relation or in an ordered thought sequence. It is true again that there is a thought and a speech
which are rather suggestive than definitive and have in their own way a greater potency and richness of content,
and this kind already verges on the intuitive: but still there is a demand in the intellect to bring out in clear
sequence and relation the exact intellectual content of these suggestions and until that is done it does not feel
satisfied that its knowledge is complete. The thought labouring in the logical intellect is that which normally seems
best to organise the mental action and gives to the mind a sense of sure definiteness, security and completeness
in its knowledge and its use of knowledge. Nothing of this is at all true of the supramental knowledge.
\par The supermind knows most completely and securely not by thought but by identity, by a pure awareness of
the self-truth
Page 831

of things in the self and by the self, \s{\=atmani \=atm\=anam \=atman\=a}. I get the supramental knowledge best by
becoming one with the truth, one with the object of knowledge; the supramental satisfaction and integral light is
most there when there is no further division between the knower, knowledge and the known, \s{j\~n\=at\=a},
\s{j\~n\=anam}, \s{j\~neyam}. I see the thing known not as an object outside myself, but as myself or a part of my
universal self contained in my most direct consciousness. This leads to the highest and completest knowledge;
thought and speech being representations and not this direct possession in the consciousness are to the supermind
a lesser form and, if not filled with the spiritual awareness, thought becomes in fact a diminution of knowledge.
For it would be, supposing it to be a supramental thought, only a partial manifestation of a greater knowledge
existing in the self but not at the time present to the immediately active consciousness. In the highest ranges of
the infinite there need be no thought at all because all would be experienced spiritually, in continuity, in eternal
possession and with an absolute directness and completeness. Thought is only one means of partially manifesting
and presenting what is hidden in this greater self-existent knowledge. This supreme kind of knowing will not
indeed be possible to us in its full extent and degree until we can rise through many grades of the supermind to
that infinite. But still as the supramental power emerges and enlarges its action, something of this highest way of
knowledge appears and grows and even the members of the mental being, as they are intuitivised and
supramentalised, develop more and more a corresponding action upon their own level. There is an increasing
power of a luminous vital, psychic, emotional, dynamic and other identification with all the things and beings that
are the objects of our consciousness and these transcendings of the separative consciousness bring with them
many forms and means of a direct knowledge.
\par The supramental knowledge or experience by identity carries in it as a result or as a secondary part of itself
a supramental vision that needs the support of no image, can concretise what is to the mind abstract and has the
character of sight though its
Page 832

object may be the invisible truth of that which has form or the truth of the formless. This vision can come before
there is any identity, as a sort of previous emanation of light from it, or may act detached from it as a separate
power. The truth or the thing known is then not altogether or not yet one with myself, but an object of my
knowledge: but still it is an object subjectively seen in the self or at least, even if it is still farther separated and
objectivised to the knower, by the self, not through any intermediate process, but by a direct inner seizing or a
penetrating and enveloping luminous contact of the spiritual consciousness with its object. It is this luminous
seizing and contact that is the spiritual vision, \s{d\,r\,s\,ti},—“\s{pa\'syati}”, says the Upanishad continually of the
spiritual knowledge, “he sees”; and of the Self conceiving the idea of creation, where we should expect “he
thought”, it says instead “he saw”. It is to the spirit what the eyes are to the physical mind and one has the sense
of having passed through a subtly analogous process. As the physical sight can present to us the actual body of
things of which the thought had only possessed an indication or mental description and they become to us at once
real and evident, \s{pratyak\,sa}, so the spiritual sight surpasses the indications or representations of thought and
can make the self and truth of all things present to us and directly evident, \s{pratyak\,sa}.
\par The sense can only give us the superficial image of things and it needs the aid of thought to fill and inform
the image; but the spiritual sight is capable of presenting to us the thing in itself and all truth about it. The seer
does not need the aid of thought in its process as a means of knowledge, but only as a means of representation
and expression,—thought is to him a lesser power and used for a secondary purpose. If a further extension of
knowledge is required, he can come at it by new seeing without the slower thought processes that are the staff
of support of the mental search and its feeling out for truth,—even as we scrutinise with the eye to find what
escaped our first observation. This experience and knowledge by spiritual vision is the second in directness and
greatness of the supramental powers. It is something much more near, profound and comprehensive
Page 833

than mental vision, because it derives direct from the knowledge by identity, and it has this virtue that we can
proceed at once from the vision to the identity, as from the identity to the vision. Thus when the spiritual vision
has seen God, Self or Brahman, the soul can next enter into and become one with the Self, God or Brahman.
\par This can only be done integrally on or above the supramental level, but at the same time the spiritual vision
can take on mental forms of itself that can help towards this identification each in its own way. A mental intuitive
vision or a spiritualised mental sight, a psychic vision, an emotional vision of the heart, a vision in the sense mind
are parts of the Yogic experience. If these seeings are purely mental, then they may but need not be true, for the
mind is capable of both truth and error, both of a true and of a false representation. But as the mind becomes
intuitivised and supramentalised, these powers are purified and corrected by the more luminous action of the
supermind and become themselves forms of a supramental and a true seeing. The supramental vision, it may be
noted, brings with it a supplementary and completing experience that might be called a spiritual hearing and touch
of the truth,—of its essence and through that of its significance,—that is to say, there is a seizing of its
movement, vibration, rhythm and a seizing of its close presence and contact and substance. All these powers
prepare us to become one with that which has thus grown near to us through knowledge.
\par The supramental thought is a form of the knowledge by identity and a development, in the idea, of the truth
presented to the supramental vision. The identity and the vision give the truth in its essence, its body and its parts
in a single view: the thought translates this direct consciousness and immediate power of the truth into
idea-knowledge and will. It adds or need add otherwise nothing new, but reproduces, articulates, moves round
the body of the knowledge. Where, however, the identity and the vision are still incomplete, the supramental
thought has a larger office and reveals, interprets or recalls as it were to the soul's memory what they are not yet
ready to give. And where these
Page 834

greater states and powers are still veiled, the thought comes in front and prepares and to a certain extent effects
a partial rending or helps actively in the removal of the veil. Therefore in the development out of the mental
ignorance into the supramental knowledge this illumined thought comes to us often though not always first, to
open the way to the vision or else to give first supports to the growing consciousness of identity and its greater
knowledge. This thought is also an effective means of communication and expression and helps to an impression
or fixation of the truth whether on one's own lower mind and being or on that of others. The supramental thought
differs from the intellectual not only because it is the direct truth idea and not a representation of truth to the
ignorance,—it is the truth consciousness of the spirit always presenting to itself its own right forms, the
\s{satyam} and \s{\,rtam} of the Veda,—but because of its strong reality, body of light and substance.
\par The intellectual thought refines and sublimates to a rarefied abstractness; the supramental thought as it rises
in its height increases to a greater spiritual concreteness. The thought of the intellect presents itself to us as an
abstraction from something seized by the mind sense and is as if supported in a void and subtle air of mind by an
intangible force of the intelligence. It has to resort to a use of the mind's power of image if it wishes to make
itself more concretely felt and seen by the soul sense and soul vision. The supramental thought on the contrary
presents always the idea as a luminous substance of being, luminous stuff of consciousness taking significative
thought form and it therefore creates no such sense of a gulf between the idea and the real as we are liable to
feel in the mind, but is itself a reality, it is real-idea and the body of a reality. It has as a result, associated with it
when it acts according to its own nature, a phenomenon of spiritual light other than the intellectual clarity, a great
realising force and a luminous ecstasy. It is an intensely sensible vibration of being, consciousness and Ananda.
\par The supramental thought, as has already been indicated, has three elevations of its intensity, one of direct
thought vision, another of interpretative vision pointing to and preparing the
Page 835

greater revelatory idea-sight, a third of representative vision recalling as it were to the spirit's knowledge the truth
that is called out more directly by the higher powers. In the mind these things take the form of the three ordinary
powers of the intuitive mentality,—the suggestive and discriminating intuition, the inspiration and the thought that
is of the nature of revelation. Above they correspond to three elevations of the supramental being and
consciousness and, as we ascend, the lower first calls down into itself and is then taken up into the higher, so that
on each level all the three elevations are reproduced, but always there predominates in the thought essence the
character that belongs to that level's proper form of consciousness and spiritual substance. It is necessary to bear
this in mind; for otherwise the mentality, looking up to the ranges of the supermind as they reveal themselves,
may think it has got the vision of the highest heights when it is only the highest range of the lower ascent that is
being presented to its experience. At each height, \s{s\=ano\,h s\=anum \=aruhat}, the powers of the supermind increase
in intensity, range and completeness.
\par There is also a speech, a supramental word, in which the higher knowledge, vision or thought can clothe
itself within us for expression. At first this may come down as a word, a message or an inspiration that descends
to us from above or it may even seem a voice of the Self or of the Ishwara, \s{v\=a\,n\=i}, \s{\=ade\'sa}. Afterwards it
loses that separate character and becomes the normal form of the thought when it expresses itself in the form of
an inward speech. The thought may express itself without the aid of any suggestive or developing word and
only—but still quite completely, explicitly and with its full contents—in a luminous substance of supramental
perception. It may aid itself when it is not so explicit by a suggestive inward speech that attends it to bring out its
whole significance. Or the thought may come not as silent perception but as speech self-born out of the truth and
complete in its own right and carrying in itself its own vision and knowledge. Then it is the word revelatory,
inspired or intuitive or of a yet greater kind capable of bearing the infinite intention or suggestion of the higher
supermind and spirit. It may frame
Page 836

itself in the language now employed to express the ideas and perceptions and impulses of the intellect and the
sense mind, but it uses it in a different way and with an intense bringing out of the intuitive or revelatory
significances of which speech is capable. The supramental word manifests inwardly with a light, a power, a
rhythm of thought and a rhythm of inner sound that make it the natural and living body of the supramental thought
and vision and it pours into the language, even though the same as that of mental speech, another than the limited
intellectual, emotional or sensational significance. It is formed and heard in the intuitive mind or supermind and
need not at first except in certain highly gifted souls come out easily into speech and writing, but that too can be
freely done when the physical consciousness and its organs have been made ready, and this is a part of the
needed fullness and power of the integral perfection.
\par The range of knowledge covered by the supramental thought, experience and vision will be commensurate
with all that is open to the human consciousness, not only on the earthly but on all planes. It will however act
increasingly in an inverse sense to that of the mental thinking and experience. The centre of mental thinking is
the ego, the person of the individual thinker. The supramental man on the contrary will think more with the
universal mind or even may rise above it, and his individuality will rather be a vessel of radiation and
communication to which the universal thought and knowledge of the Spirit will converge than a centre. The
mental man thinks and acts in a radius determined by the smallness or largeness of his mentality and of its
experience. The range of the supramental man will be all the earth and all that lies behind it on other planes of
existence. And finally the mental man thinks and sees on the level of the present life, though it may be with an
upward aspiration, and his view is obstructed on every side. His main basis of knowledge and action is the
present with a glimpse into the past and ill-grasped influence from its pressure and a blind look towards the
future. He bases himself on the actualities of the earthly existence, first on the facts of the outward world,—
Page 837

to which he is ordinarily in the habit of relating nine tenths if not the whole of his inner thinking and
experience,—then on the changing actualities of the more superficial part of his inner being. As he increases in
mind, he goes more freely beyond these to potentialities which arise out of them and pass beyond them; his mind
deals with a larger field of possibilities: but these for the most part get to him a full reality only in proportion as
they are related to the actual and can be made actual here, now or hereafter. The essence of things he tends to
see, if at all, only as a result of his actualities, in a relation to and dependence on them, and therefore he sees
them constantly in a false light or in a limited measure. In all these respects the supramental man must proceed
from the opposite principle of truth vision.
\par The supramental being sees things from above in large spaces and at the highest from the spaces of the
infinite. His view is not limited to the standpoint of the present but can see in the continuities of time or from
above time in the indivisibilities of the Spirit. He sees truth in its proper order first in the essence, secondly in the
potentialities that derive from it and only last in the actualities. The essential truths are to his sight self-existent,
self-seen, not dependent for their proof on this or that actuality; the potential truths are truths of the power of
being in itself and in things, truths of the infinity of force and real apart from their past or present realisation in
this or that actuality or the habitual surface forms that we take for the whole of Nature; the actualities are only a
selection from the potential truths he sees, dependent on them, limited and mutable. The tyranny of the present,
of the actual, of the immediate range of facts, of the immediate urge and demand of action has no power over his
thought and his will and he is therefore able to have a larger will-power founded on a larger knowledge. He sees
things not as one on the levels surrounded by the jungle of present facts and phenomena but from above, not
from outside and judged by their surfaces, but from within and viewed from the truth of their centre; therefore he
is nearer the divine omniscience. He wills and acts from a dominating height and with a longer movement in time
and a larger range of potencies, therefore
Page 838

he is nearer to the divine omnipotence. His being is not shut into the succession of the moments, but has the full
power of the past and ranges seeingly through the future: not shut in the limiting ego and personal mind, but lives
in the freedom of the universal, in God and in all beings and all things; not in the dull density of the physical mind,
but in the light of the self and the infinity of the spirit. He sees soul and mind only as a power and a movement
and matter only as a resultant form of the spirit. All his thought will be of a kind that proceeds from knowledge.
He perceives and enacts the things of the phenomenal life in the light of the reality of the spiritual being and the
power of the dynamic spiritual essence.
\par At first, at the beginning of the conversion into this greater status, the thought will continue to move for a
shorter or a longer time to a greater or a less extent on the lines of the mind but with a greater light and
increasing flights and spaces and movements of freedom and transcendence. Afterwards the freedom and
transcendence will begin to predominate; the inversion of the thought view and the conversion of the thought
method will take place in different movements of the thought mind one after the other, subject to whatever
difficulties and relapses, until it has gained on the whole and effected a complete transformation. Ordinarily the
supramental knowledge will be organised first and with the most ease in the processes of pure thought and
knowledge, \s{j\~n\=ana}, because here the human mind has already the upward tendency and is the most free. Next
and with less ease it will be organised in the processes of applied thought and knowledge because there the mind
of man is at once most active and most bound and wedded to its inferior methods. The last and most difficult
conquest, because this is now to his mind a field of conjecture or a blank, will be the knowledge of the three
times, \s{trik\=alad\,r\,s\,ti}. In all these there will be the same character of a spirit seeing and willing directly above
and around and not only in the body it possesses and there will be the same action of the supramental knowledge
by identity, the supramental vision, the supramental thought and supramental word, separately or in a united
movement.
Page 839

\par This then will be the general character of the supramental thought and knowledge and these its main powers
and action. It remains to consider its particular instrumentation, the change that the supermind will make in the
different elements of the present human mentality and the special activities that give to the thought its
constituents, motives and data.
Page 840

\par
\hn Chapter XXIII
\par
\ht The Supramental Instruments—\nl Thought-Process
\par\drop The supermind, the divine gnosis, is not something entirely alien to our present consciousness: it is a
superior instrumentation of the spirit and all the operations of our normal consciousness are limited and inferior
derivations from the supramental, because these are tentatives and constructions, that the true and perfect, the
spontaneous and harmonious nature and action of the spirit. Accordingly when we rise from mind to supermind,
the new power of consciousness does not reject, but uplifts, enlarges and transfigures the operations of our soul
and mind and life. It exalts and gives to them an ever greater reality of their power and performance. It does not
limit itself either to the transformation of the superficial powers and action of the mind and psychic parts and the
life, but it manifests and transforms also those rarer powers and that larger force and knowledge proper to our
subliminal self that appear now to us as things occult, curiously psychic, abnormal. These things become in the
supramental nature not at all abnormal but perfectly natural and normal, not separately psychic but spiritual, not
occult and strange, but a direct, simple, inherent and spontaneous action. The spirit is not limited like the waking
material consciousness, and the supermind when it takes possession of the waking consciousness, dematerialises
it, delivers it from its limits, converts the material and the psychic into the nature of the spiritual being.
\par The mental activity that can be most readily organised is, as has been already indicated, that of pure ideative
knowledge. This is transformed on the higher level to the true \s{j\~n\=ana}, supramental thought, supramental vision,
the supramental knowledge by identity. The essential action of this supramental knowledge has
Page 841

been described in the preceding chapter. It is necessary however to see also how this knowledge works in
outward application and how it deals with the data of existence. It differs from the action of the mind first in this
respect that it works naturally with those operations that are to the mind the highest and the most difficult, acting
in them or on them from above downward and not with the hampered straining upward of the mind or with its
restriction to its own and the inferior levels. The higher operations are not dependent on the lower assistance, but
rather the lower operations depend on the higher not only for their guidance but for their existence. The lower
mental operations are therefore not only changed in character by the transformation, but are made entirely
subordinate. And the higher mental operations too change their character, because, supramentalised, they begin
to derive their light directly from the highest, the self-knowledge or infinite knowledge.
\par The normal thought-action of the mind may for this purpose be viewed as constituted of a triple motion. First
and lowest and most necessary to the mental being in the body is the habitual thought mind that founds its ideas
upon the data given by the senses and by the surface experiences of the nervous and emotional being and on the
customary notions formed by the education and the outward life and environment. This habitual mind has two
movements, one a kind of constant undercurrent of mechanically recurrent thought always repeating itself in the
same round of physical, vital, emotional, practical and summarily intellectual notion and experience, the other
more actively working upon all new experience that the mind is obliged to admit and reducing it to formulas of
habitual thinking. The mentality of the average man is limited by this habitual mind and moves very imperfectly
outside its circle.
\par A second grade of the thinking activity is the pragmatic idea mind that lifts itself above life and acts
creatively as a mediator between the idea and the life-power, between truth of life and truth of the idea not yet
manifested in life. It draws material from life and builds out of it and upon it creative ideas that become dynamic
for farther life development: on the other side it receives
Page 842

new thought and mental experience from the mental plane or more fundamentally from the idea power of the
Infinite and \NH immediately turns it into mental idea force and a power for actual being and living. The whole
turn of this pragmatic idea mind is towards action and experience, inward as well as outward, the inward casting
itself outward for the sake of a completer satisfaction of reality, the outward taken into the inward and returning
upon it assimilated and changed for fresh formations. The thought is only or mainly interesting to the soul on this
mental level as a means for a large range of action and experience.
\par A third gradation of thinking opens in us the pure ideative mind which lives disinterestedly in truth of the idea
apart from any necessary dependence on its value for action and experience. It views the data of the senses and
the superficial inner experience, but only to find the idea, the truth to which they bear witness and to reduce them
into terms of knowledge. It observes the creative action of mind in life in the same way and for the same
purpose. Its preoccupation is with knowledge, its whole object is to have the delight of ideation, the search for
truth, the effort to know itself and the world and all that may lie behind its own action and the world action. This
ideative mind is the highest reach of the intellect acting for itself, characteristically, in its own power and for its
own purpose.
\par It is difficult for the human mind to combine rightly and harmonise these three movements of the
intelligence. The \NH ordinary man lives mainly in the habitual, has a comparatively feeble action of the creative
and pragmatic and experiences a great difficulty in using at all or entering into the movement of the pure ideative
mentality. The creative pragmatic mind is commonly too much occupied with its own motion to move freely and
disinterestedly in the atmosphere of pure ideative order and on the other hand has often an insufficient grasp on
the actualities imposed by the habitual mentality and the obstacles it imposes as also on other movements of
pragmatic thought and action than that which it is itself interested in building. The pure ideative mentality tends to
construct abstract and arbitrary systems of truth, intellectual sections and ideative edifices, and
Page 843

either misses the pragmatic movement necessary to life and lives only or mainly in ideas, or cannot act with
sufficient power and directness in the life field and is in danger of being divorced from or weak in the world of
the practical and habitual mentality. An accommodation of some kind is made, but the tyranny of the predominant
tendency interferes with the wholeness and unity of the thinking being. Mind fails to be assured master even of
its own totality, because the secret of that totality lies beyond it in the free unity of the self, free and therefore
capable of an infinite multiplicity and diversity, and in the supramental power that can alone bring out in a natural
perfection the organic multiple movement of the self's unity.
\par The supermind in its completeness reverses the whole order of the mind's thinking. It lives not in the
phenomenal, but in the essential, in the self, and sees all as being of the self and its power and form and
movement, and all the thought and the process of the thought in the supermind must also be of that character. All
its fundamental ideation is a rendering of the spiritual knowledge that acts by identity with all being and of the
supramental vision. It moves therefore primarily among the eternal, the essential and the universal truths of self
and being and consciousness and infinite power and delight of being (not excluding all that seems to our present
consciousness non-being), and all its particular thinking originates from and depends upon the power of these
eternal verities; but in the second place it is at home too with infinite aspects and applications, sequences and
harmonies of the truths of being of the Eternal. It lives therefore at its heights in all that which the action of the
pure ideative mind is an effort to reach and discover, and even on its lower ranges these things are to its
luminous receptivity present, near or easily grasped and available.
\par But while the highest truths or the pure ideas are to the ideative mind abstractions, because mind lives partly
in the phenomenal and partly in intellectual constructions and has to use the method of abstraction to arrive at the
higher realities, the supermind lives in the spirit and therefore in the very substance of what these ideas and
truths represent or rather fundamentally
Page 844

are and truly realises them, not only thinks but in the act of thinking feels and identifies itself with their substance,
and to it they are among the most substantial things that can be. Truths of consciousness and of essential being
are to the supermind the very stuff of reality, more intimately and, as one might almost say, densely real than
outward movement and form of being, although these too are to it movement and form of the reality and not, as
they are to a certain action of the spiritualised mind, an illusion. The idea too is to it real-idea, stuff of the reality
of conscious being, full of power for the substantial rendering of the truth and therefore for creation.
\par And again, while the pure ideative mind tends to build up arbitrary systems which are mental and partial
constructions of the truth, the supermind is not bound by any representation or system, though it is perfectly able
to represent and to \NH arrange and construct in the living substance of the truth for the pragmatic purposes of
the Infinite. The mind when it gets free from its exclusivenesses, systematising, attachment to its own
constructions, is at a loss in the infiniteness of the infinite, feels it as a chaos, even if a luminous chaos, is unable
any longer to formulate and therefore to think and act decisively because all, even the most diverse or
contradictory things, point at some truth in this infinity and yet nothing it can think is entirely true and all its
formulations break down under the test of new suggestions from the infinite. It begins to look on the world as a
phantasmagory and thought as a chaos of scintillations out of the luminous indefinite. The mind assailed by the
vastness and freedom of the supramental loses itself and finds no firm footing in the vastness. The supermind on
the contrary can in its freedom construct harmonies of its thought and expression of being on the firm ground of
reality while still holding its infinite liberty and rejoicing in its self of infinite vastness. All that it thinks, as all that it
is and does and lives, belongs to the truth, the right, the vast, \s{satyam}, \s{\,rtam}, \s{b\,rhat}.
\par The result of this wholeness is that there is no division or incompatibility between the free essential ideation
of the supermind corresponding to the mind's pure ideation, free,
Page 845

\NH disinterested, illimitable, and its creative, pragmatic ideation purposeful and determinative. The infinity of
being results naturally in a freedom of the harmonies of becoming. The supermind perceives always action as a
manifestation and expression of the Self and creation as a revelation of the Infinite. All its creative and pragmatic
thought is an instrument of the self's becoming, a power of illumination for that purpose, an intermediary between
the eternal identity and infinite novelty and variety of illimitable Being and its self-expression in the worlds and
life. It is this that the supermind constantly sees and embodies and while its ideative vision and thought interpret
to it the illimitable unity and variety of the Infinite, which it is by a perpetual identity and in which it lives in all its
power of being and becoming, there is constantly too a special creative thought, associated with an action of the
infinite will, Tapas, power of being, which determines what it shall present, manifest or create out of the infinite
in the course of Time, what it shall make—here and now or in any range of Time or world—of the perpetual
becoming of the self in the universe.
\par The supermind is not limited by this pragmatic movement and does not take the partial motion or the entire
stream of what it so becomes and creates in its thought and life for the whole truth of its self or of the Infinite. It
does not live only in what it is and thinks and does selectively in the present or on one plane only of being; it does
not feed its existence only on the present or the continual succession of moments to whose beats we give that
name. It does not see itself only as a movement of Time or of the consciousness in time or as a creature of the
perpetual becoming. It is aware of a timeless being beyond manifestation and of which all is a manifestation, it is
aware of what is eternal even in Time, it is aware of many planes of existence; it is aware of past truth of
manifestation and of much truth of being yet to be manifested in the future, but already existing in the self-view
of the Eternal. It does not mistake the pragmatic reality which is the truth of action and mutation for the sole
truth, but sees it as a constant realisation of that which is eternally real. It knows that creation whether on the
plane of matter or of life
Page 846

or of mind or of supermind is and can be only a self-determined presentation of eternal truth, a revelation of the
Eternal, and it is intimately aware of the pre-existence of the truth of all things in the Eternal. This seeing
conditions all its pragmatic thought and its resultant action. The maker in it is a selective power of the seer and
thinker, the self-builder a power of the self-seer, the self-expressing soul a power of the infinite spirit. It creates
freely, and all the more surely and decisively for that freedom, out of the infinite self and spirit.
\par It is therefore not prisoned in its special becoming or shut up in its round or its course of action. It is open, in
a way and a degree to which the mind cannot attain, to the truth of other harmonies of creative becoming even
while in its own it puts forth a decisive will and thought and action. When it is engaged in action that is of the
nature of a struggle, the replacing of past or other thought and form and becoming by that which it is appointed to
manifest, it knows the truth of what it displaces and fulfils even in displacing as well as the truth of what it
substitutes. It is not bound by its manifesting, selecting, pragmatic conscious action, but it has at the same time all
the joy of a specially creative thought and selective precision of action, the Ananda of the truth of the forms and
movements equally of its own and of others' becoming. All its thought and will of life and action and creation,
rich, manifold, focussing the truth of many planes, is liberated and illumined with the illimitable truth of the
Eternal.
\par This creative or pragmatic movement of the supramental thought and consciousness brings with it an action
which corresponds to that of the habitual or mechanical mentality but is yet of a very different character. The
thing that is created is the self-determination of a harmony and all harmony proceeds upon seen or given lines
and carries with it a constant pulsation and rhythmic recurrence. The supramental thought, organising the
harmony of manifested existence of the supramental being, founds it on eternal principles, casts it upon the right
lines of the truth that is to be manifested, keeps sounding as characteristic notes the recurrence of the constant
elements in the experience
Page 847

and the action which are necessary to constitute the harmony. There is an order of the thought, a cycle of the
will, a stability in the motion. At the same time its freedom prevents it from being shut up by the recurrence into a
groove of habitual action turning always mechanically round a limited stock of thinking. It does not like the
habitual mind refer and assimilate all new thought and experience to a fixed customary mould of thinking, taking
that for its basis. Its basis, that to which all is referred, is above, \s{upari budhne}, in the largeness of the self, in
the supreme foundation of the supramental truth, \s{budhne \,rtasya}. Its order of thought, its cycle of will, its
stable movement of action does not crystallise into a mechanism or convention, but is always alive with the spirit,
does not live by exclusiveness or hostility to other coexistent or possible order and cycle, but absorbs sustenance
from all that it contacts and assimilates it to its own principle. The spiritual assimilation is practicable because all
is referred to the largeness of the self and its free vision above. The order of the supramental thought and will is
constantly receiving new light and power from above and has no difficulty in accepting it into its movement; it is,
as is proper to an order of the Infinite, even in its stability of motion indescribably supple and plastic, capable of
perceiving and rendering the relation of all things to each other in the One, capable of expressing always more
and more of the Infinite, at its fullest of expressing in its own way all that is actually expressible of the Infinite.
\par Thus there is no discord, disparity or difficulty of adjustment in the complex motion of the supramental
\s{j\~n\=ana}, but a simplicity in the complexity, an assured ease in a many-sided abundance that comes from the
spontaneous sureness and totality of the self-knowledge of the spirit. Obstacle, inner struggle, disparity, difficulty,
discord of parts and movements continues in the transformation of mind to supermind only so long as the action,
influence or pressure of the mind insisting on its own methods of construction continues or its process of building
knowledge or thought and will of action on the foundation of a primal ignorance resists the opposite process of
supermind organising all as a luminous manifestation out of the self and its inherent
Page 848

and eternal self-knowledge. It is thus that the supermind acting as a representative, interpretative, revealingly
imperative power of the spirit's knowledge by identity, turning the light of the infinite consciousness freely and
illimitably into substance and form of real-idea, creating out of power of conscious being and power of real-idea,
stabilising a movement which obeys its own law but is still a supple and plastic movement of the infinite, uses its
thought and knowledge and a will identical in substance and light with the knowledge to organise in each
supramental being his own right manifestation of the one self and spirit.
\par The action of the supramental \s{j\~n\=ana} so constituted evidently surpasses the action of the mental reason
and we have to see what replaces the reason in the supramental transformation. The thinking mind of man finds
its most clear and characteristic satisfaction and its most precise and effective principle of organisation in the
reasoning and logical intelligence. It is true that man is not and cannot be wholly governed either in his thought or
his action by the reason alone. His mentality is inextricably subjected to a joint, mixed and intricate action of the
reasoning intelligence with two other powers, an intuition, actually only half luminous in the human mentality,
operating behind the more visible action of the reason or veiled and altered in the action of the normal
intelligence, and the life-mind of sensation, instinct, impulse, which is in its own nature a sort of obscure involved
intuition and which supplies the intelligence from below with its first materials and data. And each of these other
powers is in its own kind an intimate action of the spirit operating in mind and life and has a more direct and
spontaneous character and immediate power for perception and action than the reasoning intelligence. But yet
neither of these powers is capable of organising for man his mental existence.
\par His life-mind—its instincts, its impulses,—is not and cannot be self-sufficient and predominant as it is in the
lower creation. It has been seized upon by the intelligence and profoundly altered by it even where the
development of the intelligence is imperfect and itself most insistent in its prominence. It has lost most of its
intuitive character, is indeed now infinitely richer as
Page 849

a supplier of materials and data, but no longer quite itself or at ease in its action because half rationalised,
dependent at least on some infused element however vague of reasoning or intelligent activity and incapable of
acting to good purpose without the aid of the intelligence. Its roots and place of perfection are in the subconscient
from which it emerges and man's business is to increase in the sense of a more and more conscient knowledge
and action. Man reverting to a governance of his being by the life mind would become either irrational and erratic
or dull and imbecile and would lose the essential character of manhood.
\par The intuition on the other hand has its roots and its place of perfection in the supramental which is now to us
the superconscient, and in mind it has no pure and no organised action, but is immediately mixed with the action
of the reasoning intelligence, is not quite itself, but limited, fragmentary, diluted and impure, and depends for the
ordered use and organisation of its suggestions on the aid of the logical reason. The human mind is never quite
sure of its intuitions until they have been viewed and confirmed by the judgment of the rational intelligence: it is
there that it feels most well founded and secure. Man surmounting reason to organise his thought and life by the
intuitive mind would be already surpassing his characteristic humanity and on the way to the development of
supermanhood. This can only be done above: for to attempt it below is only to achieve another kind of
imperfection: there the mental reason is a necessary factor.
\par The reasoning intelligence is an intermediate agent between the life mind and the yet undeveloped
supramental intuition. Its business is that of an intermediary, on the one side to enlighten the life mind, to make it
conscient and govern and regulate as much as may be its action until Nature is ready to evolve the supramental
energy which will take hold of life and illumine and perfect all its movements by converting its obscurely intuitive
motions of desire, emotion, sensation and action into a spiritually and luminously spontaneous life manifestation of
the self and spirit. On the other higher side its mission is to take the rays of light which come from above and
translate them into terms of intelligent mentality and to accept, examine, develop,
Page 850

intellectually utilise the intuitions that escape the barrier and descend into mind from the superconscience. It does
this until man, becoming more and more intelligently conscient of himself and his environment and his being,
becomes also aware that he cannot really know these things by his reason, but can only make a mental
representation of them to his intelligence.
\par The reason, however, tends in the intellectual man to ignore the limitations of its power and function and
attempts to be not an instrument and agent but a substitute for the self and spirit. Made confident by success and
predominance, by the comparative greatness of its own light, it regards itself as a thing primary and absolute,
assures itself of its own entire truth and sufficiency and endeavours to become the absolute ruler of mind and
life. This it cannot do successfully, because it depends on the lower life intuition and on the covert supermind and
its intuitive messages for its own real substance and existence. It can only appear to itself to succeed because it
reduces all its experience to rational formulas and blinds itself to half the real nature of the thought and action
that is behind it and to the infinite deal that breaks out of its formulas. The excess of the reason only makes life
artificial and rationally mechanical, deprives it of its spontaneity and vitality and prevents the freedom and
expansion of the spirit. The limited and limiting mental reason must make itself plastic and flexible, open itself to
its source, receive the light from above, exceed itself and pass by an euthanasia of transformation into the body
of the supramental reason. Meanwhile it is given power and leading for an organisation of thought and action on
the characteristically human scale intermediate between the subconscient power of the spirit organising the life
of the animal and the superconscient power of the spirit which becoming conscient can organise the existence
and life of a spiritual supermanhood.
\par The characteristic power of the reason in its fullness is a logical movement assuring itself first of all
available materials and data by observation and arrangement, then acting upon them for a resultant knowledge
gained, assured and enlarged by a first use of the reflective powers, and lastly assuring itself
Page 851

of the correctness of its results by a more careful and formal action, more vigilant, deliberate, severely logical
which tests, rejects or confirms them according to certain secure standards and processes developed by
reflection and experience. The first business of the logical reason is therefore a right, careful and complete
observation of its available material and data. The first and easiest field of data open to our knowledge is the
world of Nature, of the physical objects made external to it by the separative action of mind, things not ourself
and therefore only indirectly knowable by an interpreting of our sense perceptions, by observation, accumulated
experience, inference and reflective thinking. Another field is our own internal being and its movements which
one knows naturally by an internally acting mental sense, by intuitive perception and constant experience and by
reflective thought on the evidences of our nature. The reason with regard even to these inner movements acts
best and knows them most correctly by detaching itself and regarding them quite impersonally and objectively, a
movement which in the Yoga of knowledge ends in viewing our own active being too as not self, a mechanism of
Nature like the rest of the world-existence. The knowledge of other thinking and conscious beings stands
between these two fields, but is gained, too, indirectly by observation, by experience, by various means of
communication and, acting on these, by reflection and inference largely founded on analogy from our knowledge
of our own nature. Another field of data which the reason has to observe is its own action and the action of the
whole human intelligence, for without that study it cannot be assured of the correctness of its knowledge or of
right method and process. Finally, there are other fields of knowledge for which the data are not so easily
available and which need the development of abnormal faculties,—the discovery of things and ranges of
existence behind the appearances of the physical world and the discovery of the secret self or principle of being
of man and of Nature. The first the logical reason can attempt to deal with, accepting subject to its scrutiny
whatever data become available, in the same way as it deals with the physical world, but ordinarily it is little
disposed to deal with them, finding it
Page 852

more easy to question and deny, and its action here is seldom assured or effective. The second it usually
attempts to discover by a constructive metaphysical logic founded on its analytic and synthetic observation of the
phenomena of life, mind and matter.
\par The operation of the logical reason is the same in all these fields of its data. At first the intelligence amasses
a store of observations, associations, percepts, recepts, concepts, makes a more or less obvious arrangement and
classification of relations and of things according to their likenesses and differences, and works upon them by an
accumulating store and a constant addition of ideas, memories, imaginations, judgments; these make up primarily
the nature of activity of our knowledge. There is a kind of natural enlargement of this intelligent activity of the
mind progressing by its own momentum, an evolution aided more and more by a deliberate culture, the increase
of faculties gained by the culture becoming in its turn a part of the nature as they settle into a more spontaneous
action,—the result a progression not of the character and essential power of the intelligence, but of its degree of
power, flexibility, variety of capacity, fineness. There is a correction of errors, an accumulating of assured ideas
and judgments, a reception or formation of fresh knowledge. At the same time a necessity arises for a more
precise and assured action of the intelligence which will get rid of the superficiality of this ordinary method of the
intelligence, test every step, scrutinise severely every conclusion and reduce the mind's action to a well-founded
system and order.
\par This movement develops the complete logical mind and raises to its acme the acuteness and power of the
intelligence. The rougher and more superficial observation is replaced or supplemented by a scrutinising analysis
of all the process, properties, constituents, energies making up or related to the object and a synthetic
construction of it as a whole which is added to or in great part substituted for the mind's natural conception of it.
The object is more precisely distinguished from all others and at the same time there is a completer discovery of
its relations with others. There is a fixing of sameness or likeness and kinship and also of divergences and
differences resulting on one side in
Page 853

the perception of the fundamental unity of being and Nature and the similarity and continuity of their processes,
on the other in a clear precision and classification of different energies and kinds of beings and objects. The
amassing and ordering of the materials and data of knowledge are carried to perfection as far as is possible to
the logical intelligence.
\par Memory is the indispensable aid of the mind to preserve its past observations, the memory of the individual
but also of the race, whether in the artificial form of accumulated records or the general race memory preserving
its gains with a sort of constant repetition and renewal and, an element not sufficiently appreciated, a latent
memory that can under the pressure of various kinds of stimulation repeat under new conditions past movements
of knowledge for judgment by the increased information and intelligence. The developed logical mind puts into
order the action and resources of the human memory and trains it to make the utmost use of its materials. The
human judgment naturally works on these materials in two ways, by a more or less rapid and summary
combination of observation, inference, creative or critical conclusion, insight, immediate idea—this is largely an
attempt of the mind to work in a spontaneous manner with the directness that can only be securely achieved by
the higher faculty of the intuition, for in the mind it produces much false confidence and unreliable
certitude,—and a slower but in the end intellectually surer seeking, considering and testing judgment that
develops into the careful logical action.
\par The memory and judgment are both aided by the imagination which, as a function of knowledge, suggests
possibilities not actually presented or justified by the other powers and opens the doors to fresh vistas. The
developed logical intelligence uses the imagination for suggesting new discovery and hypothesis, but is careful to
test its suggestions fully by observation and a sceptical or scrupulous judgment. It insists too on testing, as far as
may be, all the action of the judgment itself, rejects hasty inference in favour of an ordered system of deduction
and induction and makes sure of all its steps and of the justice, continuity, compatibility, cohesion of its
conclusions. A too formalised \NH logical mind
Page 854

discourages, but a free use of the whole action of the logical intelligence may rather heighten a certain action of
immediate insight, the mind's nearest approach to the higher intuition, but it does not place on it an unqualified
reliance. The endeavour of the logical reason is always by a detached, disinterested and carefully founded
method to get rid of error, of prejudgment, of the mind's false confidence and arrive at reliable certitudes.
\par And if this elaborated method of the mind were really sufficient for truth, there would be no need of any
higher step in the evolution of knowledge. In fact, it increases the mind's hold on itself and on the world around it
and serves great and undeniable utilities: but it can never be sure whether its data supply it with the frame of a
real knowledge or only a frame useful and necessary for the human mind and will in its own present form of
action. It is more and more perceived that the knowledge of phenomena increases, but the knowledge of reality
escapes this laborious process. A time must come, is already coming when the mind perceives the necessity of
calling to its aid and developing fully the intuition and all the great range of powers that lie concealed behind our
vague use of the word and uncertain perception of its significance. In the end it must discover that these powers
can not only aid and complete but even replace its own proper action. That will be the beginning of the discovery
of the supramental energy of the spirit.
\par The supermind, as we have seen, lifts up the action of the mental consciousness towards and into the
intuition, creates an intermediate intuitive mentality insufficient in itself but greater in power than the logical
intelligence, and then lifts up and transforms that too into the true supramental action. The first well-organised
action of the supermind in the ascending order is the supramental reason, not a higher logical intellect, but a
directly luminous organisation of intimately subjective and intimately objective knowledge, the higher \s{buddhi},
the logical or rather the logos Vijnana. The supramental reason does all the work of the reasoning intelligence
and does much more, but with a greater power and in a different fashion. It is then itself taken up into a higher
range of the power of knowledge and in
Page 855

that too nothing is lost, but all farther heightened, enlarged in scope, transformed in power of action.
\par The ordinary language of the intellect is not sufficient to \NH describe this action, for the same words have
to be used, indicating a certain correspondence, but actually to connote inadequately a different thing. Thus the
supermind uses a certain sense action, employing but not limited by the physical organs, a thing which is in its
nature a form consciousness and a contact consciousness, but the mental idea and experience of sense can give
no conception of the essential and characteristic action of this supramentalised sense consciousness. Thought too
in the supramental action is a different thing from the thought of the mental intelligence. The supramental thinking
is felt at its basis as a conscious contact or union or identity of the substance of being of the knower with the
substance of being of the thing known and its figure of thought as the power of awareness of the self revealing
through the meeting or the oneness, because carrying in itself, a certain knowledge form of the object's content,
action, significance. Therefore observation, memory, judgment too mean each a different thing in the supermind
from what it is in the process of the mental intelligence.
\par The supramental reason observes all that the intelligence observes—and much more; it makes, that is to say,
the thing to be known the field of a perceptual action, in a certain way objective, that causes to emerge its nature,
character, quality, action. But this is not that artificial objectivity by which the reason in its observation tries to
extrude the element of personal or subjective error. The supermind sees everything in the self and its observation
must therefore be subjectively objective and much nearer to, though not the same as the observation of our own
internal movements regarded as an object of knowledge. It is not in the separatively personal self or by its power
that it sees and therefore it has not to be on guard against the element of personal error: that interferes only while
a mental substratum or environing atmosphere yet remains and can still throw in its influence or while the
supermind is still acting by descent into the mind to change it. And the supramental method with error
Page 856

is to eliminate it, not by any other device, but by an increasing spontaneity of the supramental discrimination and a
constant heightening of its own energy. The consciousness of supermind is a cosmic consciousness and it is in
this self of universal consciousness, in which the individual knower lives and with which he is more or less closely
united, that it holds before him the object of knowledge.
\par The knower is in his observation a witness and this relation would seem to imply an otherness and
difference, but the point is that it is not an entirely separative difference and does not bring an excluding idea of
the thing observed as completely not self, as in the mental seeing of an external object. There is always a basic
feeling of oneness with the thing known, for without this oneness there can be no supramental knowledge. The
knower carrying the object in his universalised self of consciousness as a thing held before his station of witness
vision includes it in his own wider being. The supramental observation is of things with which we are one in the
being and consciousness and are capable of knowing them even as we know ourselves by the force of that
oneness: the act of observation is a movement towards bringing out the latent knowledge.
\par There is, then, first a fundamental unity of consciousness that is greater or less in its power, more or less
completely and immediately revelatory of its contents of knowledge according to our progress and elevation and
intensity of living, feeling and seeing in the supramental ranges. There is set up between the knower and the
object of knowledge, as a result of this fundamental unity, a stream or bridge of conscious connection—one is
obliged to use images, however inadequate—and as a consequence a contact or active union enabling one to see,
feel, sense supramentally what is to be known in the object or about it. Sometimes this stream or bridge of
connection is not sensibly felt at the moment, only the results of the contact are noted, but it is always really there
and an after memory can always make us aware that it was really all the time present: as we grow in
supramentality, it becomes an abiding factor. The necessity of this stream or this bridge of connection ceases
when
Page 857

the fundamental oneness becomes a complete active oneness. This process is the basis of what Patanjali calls
\s{sa\.myama}, a concentration, directing or dwelling of the consciousness, by which, he says, one can become
aware of all that is in the object. But the necessity of concentration becomes slight or nil when the active
oneness grows; the luminous consciousness of the object and its contents becomes more spontaneous, normal,
facile.
\par There are three possible movements of this kind of supramental observation. First, the knower may project
himself in consciousness on the object, feel his cognition in contact or enveloping or penetrating it and there, as it
were in the object itself, become aware of what he has to know. Or he may by the contact become aware of
that which is in it or belongs to it, as for example the thought or feeling of another, coming from it and entering
into himself where he stands in his station of the witness. Or he may simply know in himself by a sort of
supramental cognition in his own witness station without any such projection or entrance. The starting-point and
apparent basis of the observation may be the presence of the object to the physical or other senses, but to the
supermind this is not indispensable. It may be instead an inner image or simply the idea of the object. The simple
will to know may bring to the supramental consciousness the needed knowledge—or, it may be, the will to be
known or communicate itself of the object of knowledge.
\par The elaborate process of analytical observation and synthetical construction adopted by the logical
intelligence is not the method of the supermind and yet there is a corresponding action. The supermind
distinguishes by a direct seeing and without any mental process of taking to pieces the particularities of the thing,
form, energy, action, quality, mind, soul that it has in view, and it sees too with an equal directness and without
any process of construction the significant totality of which these particularities are the incidents. It sees also the
essentiality, the Swabhava, of the thing in itself of which the totality and the particularities are the manifestation.
And again it sees, whether apart from or through the essentiality or swabhava, the one self, the one existence,
consciousness, power, force of which it is the basic expression.
Page 858

It may be observing at the time only the particularities, but the whole is implied, and {\it vice versa},—as for an
example, the total state of mind out of which a thought or a feeling arises,—and the cognition may start from one
or the other and proceed at once by immediate suggestion to the implied knowledge. The essentiality is similarly
implied in the whole and in each or all of the particulars and there may be the same rapid or immediate
alternative or alternate process. The logic of the supermind is different from that of the mind: it sees always the
self as what is, the essentiality of the thing as a fundamental expression of the being and power of the self, and
the whole and particulars as a consequent manifestation of this power and its active expression. In the fullness of
the supramental consciousness and cognition this is the constant order. All perception of unity, similarity,
difference, kind, uniqueness arrived at by the supramental reason is consonant with and depends on this order.
\par This observing action of supermind applies to all things. Its view of physical objects is not and cannot be only
a surface or outward view, even when concentrated on the externals. It sees the form, action, properties, but it is
aware at the same time of the qualities or energies, \s{gu\,na}, \s{\'sakti}, of which the form is a translation, and it
sees them not as an inference or deduction from the form or action, but feels and sees them directly in the being
of the object and quite as vividly,—one might say, with a subtle concreteness and fine substantiality,—as the
form or sensible action. It is aware too of the consciousness that manifests itself in quality, energy, form. It can
feel, know, observe, see forces, tendencies, impulsions, things abstract to us quite as directly and vividly as the
things we now call visible and sensible. It observes in just the same way persons and beings. It can take as its
starting-point or first indication the speech, action, outward signs, but it is not limited by or dependent on them. It
can know and feel and observe the very self and consciousness of another, can either proceed to that directly
through the sign or can in its more powerful action begin with it and at once, instead of seeking to know the inner
being through the evidence of the outer expression, understand rather
Page 859

all the outer expression in the light of the inner being. Even so, completely, the supramental being knows his own
inner being and nature. The supermind can too act with equal power and observe with direct experience what is
hidden behind the physical order; it can move in other planes than the material universe. It knows the self and
reality of things by identity, by experience of oneness or contact of oneness and a vision, a seeing and realising
ideation and knowledge dependent on or derived from these things, and its thought presentation of the truths of
the spirit is an expression of this kind of sight and experience.
\par The supramental memory is different from the mental, not a storing up of past knowledge and experience,
but an abiding presence of knowledge that can be brought forward or, more characteristically, offers itself, when
it is needed: it is not dependent on attention or on conscious reception, for the things of the past not known
actually or not observed can be called up from latency by an action which is yet essentially a remembrance.
Especially on a certain level all knowledge presents itself as a remembering, because all is latent or inherent in
the self of supermind. The future like the past presents itself to knowledge in the supermind as a memory of the
preknown. The imagination transformed in the supermind acts on one side as a power of true image and symbol,
always an image or index of some value or significance or other truth of being, on the other as an inspiration or
interpretative seeing of possibilities and potentialities not less true than actual or realised things. These are put in
their place either by an attendant intuitive or interpretative judgment or by one inherent in the vision of the image,
symbol or potentiality, or by a supereminent revelation of that which is behind the image or symbol or which
determines the potential and the actual and their relations and, it may be, overrides and overpasses them,
imposing ultimate truths and supreme certitudes.
\par The supramental judgment acts inseparably from the supramental observation or memory, inherent in it as a
direct seeing or cognition of values, significances, antecedents, consequences, relations, etc.; or it supervenes on
the observation as a luminous disclosing idea or suggestion; or it may go before, independent
Page 860

of any observation, and then the object called up and observed confirms visibly the truth of the idea. But in each
case it is sufficient in itself for its own purpose, is its own evidence and does not really depend for its truth on any
aid or confirmation. There is a logic of the supramental reason, but its function is not to test or scrutinise, to
support and prove or to detect and eliminate error. Its function is simply to link knowledge with knowledge, to
discover and utilise harmonies and arrangement and relations, to organise the movement of the supramental
knowledge. This it does not by any formal rule or construction of inferences but by a direct, living and immediate
seeing and placing of connection and relation. All thought in the supermind is in the nature of intuition, inspiration
or revelation and all deficiency of knowledge is to be supplied by a farther action of these powers; error is
prevented by the action of a spontaneous and luminous discrimination; the movement is always from knowledge
to knowledge. It is not rational in our sense but suprarational,—it does sovereignly what is sought to be done
stumblingly and imperfectly by the mental reason.
\par The ranges of knowledge above the supramental reason, taking it up and exceeding it, cannot well be
described, nor is it necessary here to make the endeavour. It is sufficient to say that the process here is more
sufficient, intense and large in light, imperative, instantaneous, the scope of the active knowledge larger, the way
nearer to the knowledge by identity, the thought more packed with the luminous substance of self-awareness and
all-vision and more evidently independent of any other inferior support or assistance.
\par These characteristics, it must be remembered, do not fully apply even to the strongest action of the intuitive
mentality, but are there seen only in their first glimpses. Nor can they be entirely or unmixedly evident so long as
supramentality is only forming with an undercurrent, a mixture or an environment of mental action. It is only
when mentality is overpassed and drops away into a passive silence that there can be the full disclosure and the
sovereign and integral action of the supramental gnosis.
Page 861

\par
\hn Chapter XXIV
\par
\ht The Supramental Sense
\par\drop All the instruments, all the activities of the mind have their corresponding powers in the action of the
supramental energy and are there exalted and transfigured, but have there a reverse order of priority and
necessary importance. As there is a supramental thought and essential consciousness, so too there is a
supramental sense. Sense is fundamentally not the action of certain physical organs, but the contact of
consciousness with its objects, \sforced{sa\.mj\~n\=ana}.
\par When the consciousness of the being is withdrawn wholly into itself, it is aware only of itself, of its own
being, its own consciousness, its own delight of existence, its own concentrated force of being, and of these
things not in their forms but in their essence. When it comes out of this self-immersion, it becomes aware of or it
releases or develops out of its self-immersion its activities and forms of being, of consciousness, of delight and
force. Then too, on the supramental plane, its primary awareness still remains of a kind native to and entirely
characteristic of the self-awareness of the spirit, the self-knowledge of the one and infinite; it is a knowledge that
knows all its objects, forms and activities comprehensively by being aware of them in its own infinite self,
intimately by being aware in them as their self, absolutely by being aware of them as one in self with its own
being. All its other ways of knowledge are projected from this knowledge by identity, are parts or movements of
it, or at the lowest depend on it for their truth and light, are touched and supported by it even in their own
separate way of action and refer back to it overtly or implicitly as their authority and origin.
\par The activity which is nearest to this essential knowledge by identity is the large embracing consciousness,
especially characteristic of the supramental energy, which takes into itself all truth and idea and object of
knowledge and sees them at once in their
Page 862

essence, totality and parts or aspects,—\s{vij\~n\=ana}. Its movement is a total seeing and seizing; it is a
comprehension and possession in the self of knowledge; and it holds the object of consciousness as a part of the
self or one with it, the unity being spontaneously and directly realised in the act of knowledge. Another
supramental activity puts the knowledge by identity more into the background and stresses more the objectivity of
the thing known. Its characteristic movement, descending into the mind, becomes the source of the peculiar
nature of our mental knowledge, intelligence, \s{praj\~n\=ana}. In the mind the action of intelligence involves, at the
outset, separation and otherness between the knower, knowledge and the known; but in the supermind its
movement still takes place in the infinite identity or at least in the cosmic oneness. Only, the self of knowledge
indulges the delight of putting the object of consciousness away from the more immediate nearness of the original
and eternal unity, but always in itself, and of knowing it again in another way so as to establish with it a variety of
relations of interaction which are so many minor chords in the harmony of the play of the consciousness. The
movement of this supramental intelligence, \s{praj\~n\=ana}, becomes a subordinate, a tertiary action of the
supramental for the fullness of which thought and word are needed. The primary action, because it is of the
nature of knowledge by identity or of a comprehensive seizing in the consciousness, is complete in itself and has
no need of these means of formulation. The supramental intelligence is of the nature of a truth seeing, truth
hearing and truth remembering and, though capable of being sufficient to itself in a certain way, still feels itself
more richly fulfilled by the thought and word that give it a body of expression.
\par Finally, a fourth action of the supramental consciousness completes the various possibilities of the
supramental knowledge. This still farther accentuates the objectivity of the thing known, puts it away from the
station of experiencing consciousness and again brings it to nearness by a uniting contact effected either in a
direct nearness, touch, union or less closely across the bridge or through the connecting stream of consciousness
Page 863

of which there has already been mention. It is a contacting of existence, presences, things, forms, forces,
activities, but a contacting of them in the stuff of the supramental being and energy, not in the divisions of matter
and through the physical instruments, that creates the supramental sense, \s{sa\.mj\~n\=ana}.
\par It is a little difficult to make the nature of the supramental sense understood to a mentality not yet familiar
with it by enlarged experience, because our idea of sense action is governed by the limiting experience of the
physical mind and we suppose that the fundamental thing in it is the impression made by an external object on the
physical organ of sight, hearing, smell, touch, taste, and that the business of the mind, the present central organ of
our consciousness, is only to receive the physical impression and its nervous translation and so become
intelligently conscious of the object. In order to understand the supramental change we have to realise first that
the mind is the only real sense even in the physical process: its dependence on the physical impressions is the
result of the conditions of the material evolution, but not a thing fundamental and indispensable. Mind is capable
of a sight that is independent of the physical eye, a hearing that is independent of the physical ear, and so with
the action of all the other senses. It is capable too of an awareness, operating by what appears to us as mental
impressions, of things not conveyed or even suggested by the agency of the physical organs,—an opening to
relations, happenings, forms even and the action of forces to which the physical organs could not have borne
evidence. Then, becoming aware of these rarer powers, we speak of the mind as a sixth sense; but in fact it is
the only true sense organ and the rest are no more than its outer conveniences and secondary instruments,
although by its dependence on them they have become its limitations and its too imperative and exclusive
conveyors. Again we have to realise—and this is more difficult to admit for our normal ideas in the matter—that
the mind itself is only the characteristic instrument of sense, but the thing itself, sense in its purity, \s{sa\.mj\~n\=ana},
exists behind and beyond the mind it uses and is a movement of the self, a direct and original activity of the
infinite power of its consciousness.
Page 864

The pure action of sense is a spiritual action and pure sense is itself a power of the spirit.
\par The spiritual sense is capable of knowing in its own characteristic way, which is other than that of
supramental thought or of the intelligence or spiritual comprehension, \s{vij\~n\=ana}, or knowledge by identity, all
things whatsoever, things material and what is to us immaterial, all forms and that which is formless. For all is
spiritual substance of being, substance of consciousness and force, substance of delight; and the spiritual sense,
pure \sforced{sa\.mj\~n\=ana}, is the conscious being's contactual, substantial awareness of its own extended
substance of self and in it of all that is of the infinite or universal substance. It is possible for us not only to know
by conscious identity, by a spiritual comprehension of self, of principles and aspects, force, play and action, by a
direct spiritual, supramental and intuitive thought knowledge, by the heart's spiritually and supramentally illumined
feeling, love, delight, but also to have in a very literal significance the sense—sense-knowledge or sensation—of
the spirit, the self, the Divine, the Infinite. The state described by the Upanishad in which one sees, hears, feels,
touches, senses in every way the Brahman and the Brahman only, for all things have become to the
consciousness only that and have no other, separate or independent existence, is not a mere figure of speech, but
the exact description of the fundamental action of the pure sense, the spiritual object of the pure
\sforced{sa\.mj\~n\=ana}. And in this original action,—to our experience a transfigured, glorified, infinitely blissful
action of the sense, a direct feeling out inward, around, everywhere of the self to embrace and touch and be
sensible of all that is in its universal being,—we can become aware in a most moving and delightful way of the
Infinite and of all that is in it, cognizant, by intimate contact of our being with all being, of whatever is in the
universe.
\par The action of the supramental sense is founded on this true truth of sense; it is an organisation of this pure,
spiritual, infinite, absolute \s{sa\.mj\~n\=ana}. The supermind acting through sense feels all as God and in God, all as
the manifest touch, sight, hearing, taste, perfume, all as the felt, seen, directly experienced substance
Page 865

and power and energy and movement, play, penetration, vibration, form, nearness, pressure, substantial
interchange of the Infinite. Nothing exists independently to its sense, but all is felt as one being and movement
and each thing as indivisible from the rest and as having in it all the Infinite, all the Divine. This supramental
sense has the direct feeling and experience, not only of forms, but of forces and of the energy and the quality in
things and of a divine substance and presence which is within them and round them and into which they open and
expand themselves in their secret subtle self and elements, extending themselves in oneness into the illimitable.
Nothing to the supramental sense is really finite: it is founded on a feeling of all in each and of each in all: its
sense definition, although more precise and complete than the mental, creates no walls of limitation; it is an
oceanic and ethereal sense in which all particular sense knowledge and sensation is a wave or movement or
spray or drop that is yet a concentration of the whole ocean and inseparable from the ocean. Its action is a result
of the extension and vibration of being and consciousness in a supra-ethereal ether of light, ether of power, ether
of bliss, the Ananda Akasha of the Upanishads, which is the matrix and continent of the universal expression of
the Self,—here in body and mind experienced only in limited extensions and vibrations,—and the medium of its
true experience. This sense even at its lowest power is luminous with a revealing light that carries in it the secret
of the thing it experiences and can therefore be a starting-point and basis of all the rest of the supramental
knowledge,—the supramental thought, spiritual intelligence and comprehension, conscious identity,—and on its
highest plane or at its fullest intensity of action it opens into or contains and at once liberates these things. It is
strong with a luminous power that carries in it the force of self-realisation and an intense or infinite effectiveness,
and this sense-experience can therefore be the starting-point of impulsion for a creative or fulfilling action of the
spiritual and supramental will and knowledge. It is rapturous with a powerful and luminous delight that makes of
it, makes of all sense and sensation a key to or a vessel of the divine and infinite Ananda.
Page 866

\par The supramental sense can act in its own power and is independent of the body and the physical life and
outer mind and it is above too the inner mind and its experiences. It can be aware of all things in whatever world,
on whatever plane, in whatever formation of universal consciousness. It can be aware of the things of the
material universe even in the trance of samadhi, aware of them as they are or appear to the physical sense, even
as it is of other states of experience, of the pure vital, the mental, the psychical, the supramental presentation of
things. It can in the waking state of the physical consciousness present to us the things concealed from the
limited receptivity or beyond the range of the physical organs, distant forms, scenes and happenings, things that
have passed out of physical existence or that are not yet in physical existence, scenes, forms, happenings,
symbols of the vital, psychical, mental, supramental, spiritual worlds and all these in their real or significant truth
as well as their appearance. It can use all the other states of sense consciousness and their appropriate senses
and organs adding to them what they have not, setting right their errors and supplying their deficiencies: for it is
the source of the others and they are only inferior derivations from this higher sense, this true and illimitable
\s{sa\.mj\~n\=ana}.
\par
\tstar
\par The lifting of the level of consciousness from the mind to the supermind and the consequent transformation
of the being from the state of the mental to that of the supramental Purusha must bring with it to be complete a
transformation of all the parts of the nature and all its activities. The whole mind is not merely made into a
passive channel of the supramental activities, a channel of their downflow into the life and body and of their
outflow or communication with the outward world, the material existence,—that is only the first stage of the
process,—but is itself supramentalised along with all its instruments. There is accordingly a change, a profound
transformation in the physical sense, a supramentalising of the physical sight, hearing, touch, etc., that creates or
reveals to us a quite different view, not merely
Page 867

of life and its meaning, but even of the material world and all its forms and aspects. The supermind uses the
physical organs and confirms their way of action, but it develops behind them the inner and deeper senses which
see what are hidden from the physical organs and farther transforms the new sight, hearing, etc. thus created by
casting it into its own mould and way of sensing. The change is one that takes nothing from the physical truth of
the object, but adds to it its supraphysical truth and takes away by the removal of the physical limitation the
element of falsehood in the material way of experience.
\par The supramentalising of the physical sense brings with it a result similar in this field to that which we
experience in the transmutation of the thought and consciousness. As soon as the sight, for example, becomes
altered under the influence of the supramental seeing, the eye gets a new and transfigured vision of things and of
the world around us. Its sight acquires an extraordinary totality and an immediate and embracing precision in
which the whole and every detail stand out at once in the complete harmony and vividness of the significance
meant by Nature in the object and its realisation of the idea in form, executed in a triumph of substantial being. It
is as if the eye of the poet and artist had replaced the vague or trivial unseeing normal vision, but singularly
spiritualised and glorified,—as if indeed it were the sight of the supreme divine Poet and Artist in which we were
participating and there were given to us the full seeing of his truth and intention in his design of the universe and
of each thing in the universe. There is an unlimited intensity which makes all that is seen a revelation of the glory
of quality and idea and form and colour. The physical eye seems then to carry in itself a spirit and a
consciousness which sees not only the physical aspect of the object but the soul of quality in it, the vibration of
energy, the light and force and spiritual substance of which it is made. Thus there comes through the physical
sense to the total sense consciousness within and behind the vision a revelation of the soul of the thing seen and
of the universal spirit that is expressing itself in this objective form of its own conscious being.
Page 868

\par There is at the same time a subtle change which makes the sight see in a sort of fourth dimension, the
character of which is a certain internality, the seeing not only of the superficies and the outward form but of that
which informs it and subtly extends around it. The material object becomes to this sight something different from
what we now see, not a separate object on the background or in the environment of the rest of Nature, but an
indivisible part and even in a subtle way an expression of the unity of all that we see. And this unity that we see
becomes not only to the subtler consciousness but to the mere sense, to the illumined physical sight itself, that of
the identity of the Eternal, the unity of the Brahman. For to the supramentalised seeing the material world and
space and material objects cease to be material in the sense in which we now on the strength of the sole
evidence of our limited physical organs and of the physical consciousness that looks through them receive as our
gross perception and understand as our conception of matter. It and they appear and are seen as spirit itself in a
form of itself and a conscious extension. The whole is a unity—the oneness unaffected by any multitudinousness
of objects and details—held in and by the consciousness in a spiritual space and all substance there is conscious
substance. This change and this totality of the way of seeing comes from the exceeding of the limitations of our
present physical sense, because the power of the subtle or psychical eye has been infused into the physical and
there has again been infused into this psycho-physical power of vision the spiritual sight, the pure sense, the
supramental \sforced{sa\.mj\~n\=ana}.
\par All the other senses undergo a similar transformation. All that the ear listens to, reveals the totality of its
sound body and sound significance and all the tones of its vibration and reveals also to the single and complete
hearing the quality, the rhythmic energy, the soul of the sound and its expression of the one universal spirit. There
is the same internality, the going of the sense into the depths of the sound and the finding there of that which
informs it and extends it into unity with the harmony of all sound and no less with the harmony of all silence, so
that the ear is always listening to the infinite in its heard expression
Page 869

and the voice of its silence. All sounds become to the supramentalised ear the voice of the Divine, himself born
into sound, and a rhythm of the concord of the universal symphony. And there is too the same completeness,
vividness, intensity, the revelation of the self of the thing heard and the spiritual satisfaction of the self in hearing.
The supramentalised touch also contacts or receives the touch of the Divine in all things and knows all things as
the Divine through the conscious self in the contact: and there is too the same totality, intensity, revelation of all
that is in and behind the touch to the experiencing consciousness. There comes a similar transformation of the
other senses.
\par There is at the same time an opening of new powers in all the senses, an extension of range, a stretching out
of the physical consciousness to an undreamed capacity. The supramental transformation extends too the
physical consciousness far beyond the limits of the body and enables it to receive with a perfect concreteness the
physical contact of things at a distance. And the physical organs become capable of serving as channels for the
psychic and other senses so that we can see with the physical waking eye what is ordinarily revealed only in the
abnormal states and to the psychical vision, hearing or other sense knowledge. It is the spirit or the inner soul that
sees and senses, but the body and its powers are themselves spiritualised and share directly in the experience.
The entire material sensation is supramentalised and it becomes aware, directly and with a physical participation
and, finally, a unity with the subtler instrumentation, of forces and movements and the physical, vital, emotional,
mental vibrations of things and beings and feels them all not only spiritually or mentally but physically in the self
and as movements of the one self in these many bodies. The wall that the limitations of the body and its senses
have built around us is abolished even in the body and the senses and there is in its place the free communication
of the eternal oneness. All sense and sensation becomes full of the divine light, the divine power and intensity of
experience, a divine joy, the delight of the Brahman. And even that which is now to us discordant and jars on the
senses takes its place in the universal concord of the universal
Page 870

movement, reveals its \s{rasa}, meaning, design and, by delight in its intention in the divine consciousness and its
manifestation of its law and dharma, its harmony with the total self, its place in the manifestation of the divine
being, becomes beautiful and happy to the soul experience. All sensation becomes Ananda.
\par The embodied mind in us is ordinarily aware only through the physical organs and only of their objects and of
subjective experiences which seem to start from the physical experience and to take them alone, however
remotely, for their foundation and mould of construction. All the rest, all that is not consistent with or part of or
verified by the physical data, seems to it rather imagination than reality and it is only in abnormal states that it
opens to other kinds of conscious experience. But in fact there are immense ranges behind of which we could be
aware if we opened the doors of our inner being. These ranges are there already in action and known to a
subliminal self in us, and much even of our surface consciousness is directly projected from them and without our
knowing it influences our subjective experience of things. There is a range of independent vital or pranic
experiences behind, subliminal to and other than the surface action of the vitalised physical consciousness. And
when this opens itself or acts in any way, there are made manifest to the waking mind the phenomena of a vital
consciousness, a vital intuition, a vital sense not dependent on the body and its instruments, although it may use
them as a secondary medium and a recorder. It is possible to open completely this range and, when we do so, we
find that its operation is that of the conscious life force individualised in us contacting the universal life force and
its operations in things, happenings and persons. The mind becomes aware of the life consciousness in all things,
responds to it through our life consciousness with an immediate directness not limited by the ordinary
communication through the body and its organs, records its intuitions, becomes capable of experiencing existence
as a translation of the universal Life or Prana. The field of which the vital consciousness and the vital sense are
primarily aware is not that of forms but, directly, that of forces: its world is a world of the play of energies, and
form and event are sensed
Page 871

only secondarily as a result and embodiment of the energies. The mind working through the physical senses can
only construct a view and knowledge of this nature as an idea in the intelligence, but it cannot go beyond the
physical translation of the energies, and it has therefore no real or direct experience of the true nature of life, no
actual realisation of the life force and the life spirit. It is by opening this other level or depth of experience within
and by admission to the vital consciousness and vital sense that the mind can get the true and direct experience.
Still, even then, so long as it is on the mental level, the experience is limited by the vital terms and their mental
renderings and there is an obscurity even in this greatened sense and knowledge. The supramental
transformation supravitalises the vital, reveals it as a dynamics of the spirit, makes a complete opening and a true
revelation of all the spiritual reality behind and within the life force and the life spirit and of all its spiritual as well
as its mental and purely vital truth and significance.
\par The supermind in its descent into the physical being awakens, if not already wakened by previous yogic
sadhana, the consciousness—veiled or obscure in most of us—which supports and forms there the vital sheath,
the \s{pr\=a\,na ko\,sa}. When this is awakened, we no longer live in the physical body alone, but also in a vital body
which penetrates and envelops the physical and is sensitive to impacts of another kind, to the play of the vital
forces around us and coming in on us from the universe or from particular persons or group lives or from things
or else from the vital planes and worlds which are behind the material universe. These impacts we feel even now
in their result and in certain touches and affectations, but not at all or very little in their source and their coming.
An awakened consciousness in the pranic body immediately feels them, is aware of a pervading vital force other
than the physical energy, and can draw upon it to increase the vital strength and support the physical energies,
can deal directly with the phenomena and causes of health and disease by means of this vital influx or by
directing pranic currents, can be aware of the vital and the vital-emotional atmosphere of others and deal with its
interchanges, along with
Page 872

a host of other phenomena which are unfelt by or obscure to our outward consciousness but here become
conscient and sensible. It is acutely aware of the life soul and life body in ourself and others. The supermind
takes up this vital consciousness and vital sense, puts it on its right foundation and transforms it by revealing the
life-force here as the very power of the spirit dynamised for a near and direct operation on and through subtle
and gross matter and for formation and action in the material universe.
\par The first result is that the limitations of our individual life being break down and we live no longer with a
personal life force, or not with that ordinarily, but in and by the universal life energy. It is all the universal Prana
that comes consciently streaming into and through us, keeps up there a dynamic constant eddy, an unseparated
centre of its power, a vibrant station of storage and communication, constantly fills it with its forces and pours
them out in activity upon the world around us. This life energy, again, is felt by us not merely as a vital ocean and
its streams, but as the vital way and form and body and outpouring of a conscious universal Shakti, and that
conscient Shakti reveals itself as the Chit Shakti of the Divine, the Energy of the transcendent and universal Self
and Purusha of which—or rather of whom—our universalised individuality becomes an instrument and channel.
As a result we feel ourselves one in life with all others and one with the life of all Nature and of all things in the
universe. There is a free and conscious communication of the vital energy working in us with the same energy
working in others. We are aware of their life as of our own or, at the least, of the touch and pressure and
communicated movements of our life being on them and theirs upon us. The vital sense in us becomes powerful,
intense, capable of bearing all the small or large, minute or immense vibrations of this life world on all its planes
physical and supraphysical, vital and supravital, thrills with all its movement and Ananda and is aware of and
open to all forces. The supermind takes possession of all this great range of experience, and makes it all
luminous, harmonious, experienced not obscurely and fragmentarily and subject to the limitations
Page 873

and errors of its handling by the mental ignorance, but revealed, it and each movement of it, in its truth and
totality of power and delight, and directs the great and now hardly limitable powers and capacities of the life
dynamis on all its ranges according to the simple and yet complex, the sheer and spontaneous and yet
unfalteringly intricate will of the Divine in our life. It makes the vital sense a perfect means of the knowledge of
the life forces around us, as the physical of the forms and sensations of the physical universe, and a perfect
channel too of the reactions of the active life force through us working as an instrument of self-manifestation.
\par
\tstar
\par The phenomena of this vital consciousness and sense, this direct sensation and perception of and response to
the play of subtler forces than the physical, are often included without distinction under the head of psychical
phenomena. In a certain sense it is an awakening of the psyche, the inner soul now hidden, clogged wholly or
partially covered up by the superficial activity of the physical mind and senses that brings to the surface the
submerged or subliminal inner vital consciousness and also an inner or subliminal mental consciousness and sense
capable of perceiving and experiencing directly, not only the life forces and their play and results and phenomena,
but the mental and psychical worlds and all they contain and the mental activities, vibrations, phenomena, forms,
images of this world also and of establishing a direct communication between mind and mind without the aid of
the physical organs and the limitations they impose on our consciousness. There are however two different kinds
of action of these inner ranges of the consciousness. The first is a more outer and confused activity of the
awakening subliminal mind and life which is clogged with and subject to the grosser desires and illusions of the
mind and vital being and vitiated in spite of its wider range of experience and powers and capacities by an
enormous mass of error and deformations of the will and knowledge, full of false suggestions and images, false
and distorted
Page 874

intuitions and inspirations and impulses, the latter often even depraved and perverse, and vitiated too by the
interference of the physical mind and its obscurities. This is an inferior activity to which clairvoyants, psychists,
spiritists, occultists, seekers of powers and siddhis are very liable and to which all the warnings against the
dangers and errors of this kind of seeking are more especially applicable. The seeker of spiritual perfection has
to pass as quickly as possible, if he cannot altogether avoid, this zone of danger, and the safe rule here is to be
attached to none of these things, but to make spiritual progress one's sole real objective and to put no sure
confidence in other things until the mind and life soul are purified and the light of the spirit and supermind or at
least of the spiritually illumined mind and soul are shed on these inner ranges of experience. For when the mind is
tranquillised and purified and the pure psyche liberated from the insistence of the desire soul, these experiences
are free from any serious danger,—except indeed that of limitation and a certain element of error which cannot
be entirely eliminated so long as the soul experiences and acts on the mental level. For there is then a pure action
of the true psychical consciousness and its powers, a reception of psychical experience pure in itself of the
worse deformations, although subject to the limitations of the representing mind, and capable of a high
spiritualisation and light. The complete power and truth, however, can only come by the opening of the supermind
and the supramentalising of the mental and psychical experience.
\par The range of the psychic consciousness and its experiences is almost illimitable and the variety and
complexity of its phenomena almost infinite. Only some of the broad lines and main features can be noted here.
The first and most prominent is the activity of the psychic senses of which the sight is the most developed
ordinarily and the first to manifest itself with any largeness when the veil of the absorption in the surface
consciousness which prevents the inner vision is broken. But all the physical senses have their corresponding
powers in the psychical being, there is a psychical hearing, touch, smell, taste: indeed the physical senses are
themselves in reality only a projection of
Page 875

the inner sense into a limited and externalised operation in and through and upon the phenomena of gross matter.
The psychical sight receives characteristically the images that are formed in the subtle matter of the mental or
psychical ether, \s{citt\=ak\=a\'sa}. These may be transcriptions there or impresses of physical things, persons,
scenes, happenings, whatever is, was or will be or may be in the physical universe. These images are very
variously seen and under all kinds of conditions; in samadhi or in the waking state, and in the latter with the bodily
eyes closed or open, projected on or into a physical object or medium or seen as if materialised in the physical
atmosphere or only in a psychical ether revealing itself through this grosser physical atmosphere; seen through
the physical eyes themselves as a secondary instrument and as if under the conditions of the physical vision or by
the psychical vision alone and independently of the relations of our ordinary sight to space. The real agent is
always the psychical sight and the power indicates that the consciousness is more or less awake, intermittently or
normally and more or less perfectly, in the psychical body. It is possible to see in this way the transcriptions or
impressions of things at any distance beyond the range of the physical vision or the images of the past or the
future.
\par Besides these transcriptions or impresses the psychical vision receives thought images and other forms
created by constant activity of consciousness in ourselves or in other human beings, and these may be according
to the character of the activity images of truth or falsehood or else mixed things, partly true, partly false, and may
be too either mere shells and representations or images inspired with a temporary life and consciousness and, it
may be, carrying in them in one way or another some kind of beneficent or maleficent action or some willed or
unwilled effectiveness on our minds or vital being or through them even on the body. These transcriptions,
impresses, thought images, life images, projections of the consciousness may also be representations or creations
not of the physical world, but of vital, psychic or mental worlds beyond us, seen in our own minds or projected
from other than human beings. And as there is this psychical vision of which some of the more external and
Page 876

ordinary manifestations are well enough known by the name of clairvoyance, so there is a psychical hearing and
psychical touch, taste, smell—clairaudience, clairsentience are the more external manifestations,—with precisely
the same range each in its own kind, the same fields and manner and conditions and varieties of their
phenomena.
\par These and other phenomena create an indirect, a representative range of psychical experience; but the
psychical sense has also the power of putting us in a more direct communication with earthly or supraterrestrial
beings through their psychical selves or their psychical bodies or even with things, for things also have a
psychical reality and souls or presences supporting them which can communicate with our psychical
consciousness. The most notable of these more powerful but rarer phenomena are those which attend the power
of exteriorisation of our consciousness for various kinds of action otherwise and elsewhere than in the physical
body, communication in the psychical body or some emanation or reproduction of it, oftenest, though by no means
necessarily, during sleep or trance and the setting up of relations or communication by various means with the
denizens of another plane of existence.
\par For there is a continuous scale of the planes of consciousness, beginning with the psychical and other belts
attached to and dependent on the earth plane and proceeding through the true independent vital and psychical
worlds to the worlds of the gods and the highest supramental and spiritual planes of existence. And these are in
fact always acting upon our subliminal selves unknown to our waking mind and with considerable effect on our
life and nature. The physical mind is only a little part of us and there is a much more considerable range of our
being in which the presence, influence and powers of the other planes are active upon us and help to shape our
external being and its activities. The awakening of the psychical consciousness enables us to become aware of
these powers, presences and influences in and around us; and while in the impure or yet ignorant and imperfect
mind this unveiled contact has its dangers, it enables us too, if rightly used and directed, to be no longer their
subject but their
Page 877

master and to come into conscious and self-controlled possession of the inner secrets of our nature. The
psychical consciousness reveals this interaction between the inner and the outer planes, this world and others,
partly by an awareness, which may be very constant, vast and vivid, of their impacts, suggestions,
communications to our inner thought and conscious being and a capacity of reaction upon them there, partly also
through many kinds of symbolic, transcriptive or representative images presented to the different psychical
senses. But also there is the possibility of a more direct, concretely sensible, almost material, sometimes actively
material communication—a complete though temporary physical materialisation seems to be possible—with the
powers, forces and beings of other worlds and planes. There may even be a complete breaking of the limits of
the physical consciousness and the material existence.
\par The awakening of the psychical consciousness liberates in us the direct use of the mind as a sixth sense, and
this power may be made constant and normal. The physical consciousness can only communicate with the minds
of others or know the happenings of the world around us through external means and signs and indications, and it
has beyond this limited action only a vague and haphazard use of the mind's more direct capacities, a poor range
of occasional presentiments, intuitions and messages. Our minds are indeed constantly acting and acted upon by
the minds of others through hidden currents of which we are not aware, but we have no knowledge or control of
these agencies. The psychical consciousness, as it develops, makes us aware of the great mass of thoughts,
feelings, suggestions, will impacts, influences of all kinds that we are receiving from others or sending to others
or imbibing from and throwing into the general mind atmosphere around us. As it evolves in power, precision and
clearness, we are able to trace these to their source or feel immediately their origin and transit to us and direct
consciously and with an intelligent will our own messages. It becomes possible to be aware, more or less
accurately and discerningly, of the activities of minds whether near to us physically or at a distance, to
understand, feel or identify ourselves with their temperament,
Page 878

character, thoughts, feelings, reactions, whether by a psychic sense or a direct mental perception or by a very
sensible and often intensely concrete reception of them into our mind or on its recording surface. At the same
time we can consciously make at least the inner selves and, if they are sufficiently sensitive, the surface minds of
others aware of our own inner mental or psychic self and plastic to its thoughts, suggestions, influences or even
cast it or its active image in influence into their subjective, even into their vital and physical being to work there
as a helping or moulding or dominating power and presence.
\par All these powers of the psychic consciousness need have and often have no more than a mental utility and
significance, but it can also be used with a spiritual sense and light and intention in it and for a spiritual purpose.
This can be done by a spiritual meaning and use in our psychical interchange with others, and it is largely by a
psycho-spiritual interchange of this kind that a master in Yoga helps his disciple. The knowledge of our inner
subliminal and psychic nature, of the powers and presences and influences there and the capacity of
communication with other planes and their powers and beings can also be used for a higher than any mental or
mundane object, for the possession and mastering of our whole nature and the overpassing of the intermediate
planes on the way to the supreme spiritual heights of being. But the most direct spiritual use of the psychic
consciousness is to make it an instrument of contact, communication and union with the Divine. A world of
psycho-spiritual symbols is readily opened up, illuminating and potent and living forms and instruments, which can
be made a revelation of spiritual significances, a support for our spiritual growth and the evolution of spiritual
capacity and experience, a means towards spiritual power, knowledge or Ananda. The mantra is one of these
psycho-spiritual means, at once a symbol, an instrument and a sound body for the divine manifestation, and of the
same kind are the images of the Godhead and of its personalities or powers used in meditation or for adoration in
Yoga. The great forms or bodies of the Divine are revealed through which he manifests his living presence to us
and we can more easily
Page 879

by their means intimately know, adore and give ourselves to him and enter into the different lokas, worlds of his
habitation and presence, where we can live in the light of his being. His word, command, Adesha, presence,
touch, guidance can come to us through our spiritualised psychic consciousness and, as a subtly concrete means
of transmission from the spirit, it can give us a close communication and nearness to him through all our psychic
senses. These and many more are the spiritual uses of the psychic consciousness and sense and, although
capable of limitation and deformation,—for all secondary instruments can be also by our mental capacity of
exclusive self-limitation means of a partial but at the same time hindrances to a more integral realisation,—they
are of the greatest utility on the road to the spiritual perfection and afterwards, liberated from the limitation of our
minds, transformed and supramentalised, an element of rich detail in the spiritual Ananda.
\par As the physical and vital, the psychical consciousness and sense also are capable of a supramental
transformation and receive by it their own integral fullness and significance. The supermind lays hold on the
psychical being, descends into it, changes it into the mould of its own nature and uplifts it to be a part of the
supramental action and state, the supra-psychic being of the Vijnana Purusha. The first result of this change is to
base the phenomena of the psychical consciousness on their true foundation by bringing into it the permanent
sense, the complete realisation, the secure possession of the oneness of our mind and soul with the minds and
souls of others and the mind and soul of universal Nature. For always the effect of the supramental growth is to
universalise the individual consciousness. As it makes us live, even in our individual vital movement and its
relations with all around us, with the universal life, so it makes us think and feel and sense, although through an
individual centre or instrument, with the universal mind and psychical being. This has two results of great
importance.
\par First, the phenomena of the psychical sense and mind lose the fragmentariness and incoherence or else
difficult regulation and often quite artificial order which pursues them even more
Page 880

than it pursues our more normal mental activities of the surface, and they become the harmonious play of the
universal inner mind and soul in us, assume their true law and right forms and relations and reveal their just
significances. Even on the mental plane one can get by the spiritualising of the mind at some realisation of soul
oneness, but it is never really complete, at least in its application, and does not acquire this real and entire law,
form, relation, complete and unfailing truth and accuracy of its significances. And, secondly, the activity of the
psychical consciousness loses all character of abnormality, of an exceptional, irregular and even a perilously
supernormal action, often bringing a loss of hold upon life and a disturbance or an injury to other parts of the
being. It not only acquires its own right order within itself but its right relation with the physical life on one side
and with the spiritual truth of being on the other and the whole becomes a harmonious manifestation of the
embodied spirit. It is always the originating supermind that contains within itself the true values, significances and
relations of the other parts of our being and its unfolding is the condition of the integral possession of our self and
nature.
\par The complete transformation comes on us by a certain change, not merely of the poise or level of our
regarding conscious self or even of its law and character, but also of the whole substance of our conscious being.
Till that is done, the supramental consciousness manifests above the mental and psychical atmosphere of
being—in which the physical has already become a subordinate and to a large extent a dependent method of our
self's expression,—and it sends down its power, light, and influence into it to illumine it and transfigure. But only
when the substance of the lower consciousness has been changed, filled potently, wonderfully transformed,
swallowed up as it were into the greater energy and sense of being, \s{mah\=an}, \s{b\,rhat}, of which it is a
derivation and projection, do we have the perfected, entire and constant supramental consciousness. The
substance, the conscious ether of being in which the mental or psychic consciousness and sense live and see and
feel and experience is something subtler, freer, more plastic than that of the physical
Page 881

mind and sense. As long as we are dominated by the latter, psychical phenomena may seem to us less real,
hallucinatory even, but the more we acclimatise ourselves to the psychical and to the ether of being which it
inhabits, the more we begin to see the greater truth and to sense the more spiritually concrete substance of all to
which its larger and freer mode of experience bears witness. Even, the physical may come to seem to itself
unreal and hallucinatory—but this is an exaggeration and new misleading exclusiveness due to a shifting of the
centre and a change of action of the mind and sense—or else may seem at any rate less powerfully real. When,
however, the psychical and physical experiences are well combined in their true balance, we live at once in two
complementary worlds of our being each with its own reality, but the psychical revealing all that is behind the
physical, the soul view and experience taking precedence and enlightening and explaining the physical view and
experience. The supramental transformation again changes the whole substance of our consciousness; it brings
in an ether of greater being, consciousness, sense, life, which convicts the psychical also of insufficiency and
makes it appear by itself an incomplete reality and only a partial truth of all that we are and become and witness.
\par All the experiences of the psychical are accepted and held up indeed in the supramental consciousness and
its energy, but they are filled with the light of a greater truth, the substance of a greater spirit. The psychical
consciousness is first supported and enlightened, then filled and occupied with the supramental light and power
and the revealing intensity of its vibrations. Whatever exaggeration, whatever error born of isolated incidence,
insufficiently illumined impression, personal suggestion, misleading influence and intention or other cause of
limitation or deformation interferes in the truth of the mental and psychical experience and knowledge, is
revealed and cured or vanishes, failing to stand in the light of the self-truth—\s{satyam}, \s{\,rtam}—of things,
persons, happenings, indications, representations proper to this greater largeness. All the psychical
communications, transcriptions, impresses, symbols, images receive their true value,
Page 882

take their right place, are put into their proper relations. The psychical intelligence and sensation are lit up with
the supramental sense and knowledge, their phenomena, intermediate between the spiritual and material worlds,
begin to reveal automatically their own truth and meaning and also the limitations of their truth and significance.
The images presented to the inner sight, hearing, sensation of all kinds are occupied by or held in a larger and
more luminous mass of vibrations, a greater substance of light and intensity which brings into them the same
change as in the things of the physical sense, a greater totality, precision, revealing force of sense knowledge
carried in the image. And finally all is lifted up and taken into the supermind and made a part of the infinitely
luminous consciousness, knowledge and experience of the supramental being, the Vijnana Purusha.
\par The state of the being after this supramental transformation will be in all its parts of consciousness and
knowledge that of an infinite and cosmic consciousness acting through the universalised individual Purusha. The
fundamental power will be an awareness of identity, a knowledge by identity,—an identity of being, of
consciousness, of force of being and consciousness, of delight of being, an identity with the Infinite, the Divine,
and with all that is in the Infinite, all that is the expression and manifestation of the Divine. This awareness and
knowledge will use as its means and instruments a spiritual vision of all that the knowledge by identity can found,
a supramental real idea and thought of the nature of direct thought vision, thought hearing, thought memory that
reveals, interprets or represents to the awareness the truth of all things, and an inner truth speech that expresses
it, and finally a supramental sense that provides a relation of contact in substance of being with all things and
persons and powers and forces in all the planes of existence.
\par The supramental will not depend on the instrumentation, for example, of the sense, as the physical mind is
dependent on the evidence of our senses, although it will be capable of making them a starting-point for the
higher forms of knowledge, as it will also be capable of proceeding directly through these higher forms and
making the sense only a means of formation
Page 883

and objective expression. The supramental being will transform at the same time and take up into itself the
present thinking of the mind transfigured into an immensely larger knowledge by identity, knowledge by total
comprehension, knowledge by intimate perception of detail and relation, all direct, immediate, spontaneous, all the
expression of the self's already existent eternal knowledge. It will take up, transform, supramentalise the physical
sense, the sixth sense capacities of the mind and the psychic consciousness and senses and use them as the
means of an extreme inner objectivisation of experience. Nothing will be really external to it, for it will
experience all in the unity of the cosmic consciousness which will be its own, the unity of being of the infinite
which will be its own being. It will experience matter, not only gross matter but the subtle and the most subtle, as
substance and form of the spirit, experience life and all kinds of energy as the dynamics of the spirit,
supramentalised mind as a means or channel of knowledge of the spirit, supermind as the infinite self of
knowledge and power of knowledge and Ananda of knowledge of the spirit.
Page 884

\par
\hn Chapter XXV
\par
\ht Towards the Supramental\nl Time Vision
\par\drop All being, consciousness, knowledge moves, secretly for our present surface awareness, openly when
we rise beyond it to the spiritual and supramental ranges, between two states and powers of existence, that of
the timeless Infinite and that of the Infinite deploying in itself and organising all things in time. These two states
are opposed to and incompatible with each other only for our mental logic with its constant embarrassed
stumbling around a false conception of contradictions and a confronting of eternal opposites. In reality, as we find
when we see things with a knowledge founded on the supramental identity and vision and think with the great,
profound and flexible logic proper to that knowledge, the two are only coexistent and concurrent status and
movement of the same truth of the Infinite. The timeless Infinite holds in itself, in its eternal truth of being,
beyond this manifestation, all that it manifests in Time. Its time consciousness too is itself infinite and maintains in
itself at once in a vision of totalities and of particularities, of mobile succession or moment sight and of total
stabilising vision or abiding whole sight what appears to us as the past of things, their present and their future.
\par The consciousness of the timeless Infinite can be brought home to us in various ways, but is most ordinarily
imposed on our mentality by a reflection of it and a powerful impression or else made present to us as something
above the mind, something of which it is aware, towards which it lifts, but into which it cannot enter because
itself lives only in the time sense and in the succession of the moments. If our present mind untransformed by the
supramental influence tries to enter into the timeless, it must either disappear and be lost in the trance of Samadhi
or
Page 885

else, remaining awake, it feels itself diffused in an Infinite where there is perhaps a sense of supra-physical
space, a vastness, a boundless extension of consciousness, but no time self, time movement or time order. And if
then the mental being is still mechanically aware of things in time, it is yet unable to deal with them in its own
manner, unable to establish a truth relation between the timeless and things in time and unable to act and will out
of its indefinite Infinite. The action that then remains possible to the mental Purusha is the mechanical action of
the instruments of the Prakriti continuing by force of old impulsion and habit or continued initiation of past energy,
\s{pr\=arabdha}, or else an action chaotic, unregulated, uncoordinated, a confused precipitate from an energy
which has no longer a conscious centre.
\par The supramental consciousness on the other hand is founded upon the supreme consciousness of the
timeless Infinite, but has too the secret of the deployment of the infinite Energy in time. It can either take its
station in the time consciousness and keep the timeless infinite as its background of supreme and original being
from which it receives all its organising knowledge, will and action, or it can, centred in its essential being, live in
the timeless but live too in a manifestation in time which it feels and sees as infinite and as the same Infinite, and
can bring out, sustain and develop in the one what it holds supernally in the other. Its time consciousness
therefore will be different from that of the mental being, not swept helplessly on the stream of the moments and
clutching at each moment as a stay and a swiftly disappearing standpoint, but founded first on its eternal identity
beyond the changes of time, secondly on a simultaneous eternity of Time in which past, present and future exist
together for ever in the self-knowledge and self-power of the Eternal, thirdly, in a total view of the three times as
one movement singly and indivisibly seen even in their succession of stages, periods, cycles, last—and that only
in the instrumental consciousness—in the step by step evolution of the moments. It will therefore have the
knowledge of the three times, \s{trik\=alad\,r\,s\,ti},—held of old to be a supreme sign of the seer and the Rishi,—not
as an
Page 886

abnormal power, but as its normal way of time knowledge.
\par This unified and infinite time consciousness and this vision and knowledge are the possession of the
supramental being in its own supreme region of light and are complete only on the highest levels of the
supramental nature. But in the ascent of the human consciousness through the uplifting and transmuting
evolutionary—that is to say, self-unveiling, self-developing, progressively self-perfecting—process of Yoga, we
have to take account of three successive conditions all of which have to be overpassed before we are able to
move on the highest levels. The first condition of our consciousness, that in which we now move, is this mind of
ignorance that has arisen out of the inconscience and nescience of material Nature,—ignorant but capable of
seeking for knowledge and finding it at least in a series of mental representations which may be made clues to
the true truth and, more and more refined and illuminated and rendered transparent by the influence, the
infiltration and the descent of the light from above, prepare the intelligence for opening to the capacity of true
knowledge. All truth is to this mind a thing it originally had not and has had to acquire or has still to acquire, a
thing external to it and to be gathered by experience or by following certain ascertained methods and rules of
enquiry, calculation, application of discovered law, interpretation of signs and indices. Its very knowledge implies
an antecedent nescience; it is the instrument of Avidya.
\par The second condition of consciousness is potential only to the human being and gained by an inner
enlightening and transformation of the mind of ignorance; it is that in which the mind seeks for its source of
knowledge rather within than without and becomes to its own feeling and self-experience, by whatever means, a
mind, not of original ignorance, but of self-forgetful knowledge. This mind is conscious that the knowledge of all
things is hidden within it or at least somewhere in the being, but as if veiled and forgotten, and the knowledge
comes to it not as a thing acquired from outside, but always secretly there and now remembered and known at
once to be true,—each thing in its own place, degree, manner and measure. This is
Page 887

its attitude to knowledge even when the occasion of knowing is some external experience, sign or indication,
because that is to it only the occasion and its reliance for the truth of the knowledge is not on the external
indication or evidence but on the inner confirming witness. The true mind is the universal within us and the
individual is only a projection on the surface, and therefore this second state of consciousness we have either
when the individual mind goes more and more inward and is always consciously or subconsciously near and
sensitive to the touches of the universal mentality in which all is contained, received, capable of being made
manifest, or, still more powerfully, when we live in the consciousness of universal mind with the personal
mentality only as a projection, a marking board or a communicating switch on the surface.
\par The third state of consciousness is that of the mind of knowledge in which all things and all truths are
perceived and experienced as already present and known and immediately available by merely turning the inner
light upon it, as when one turns the eye upon things in a room already known and familiar,—though not always
present to the vision because that is not attentive,—and notes them as objects of a pre-existent knowledge. The
difference from the second self-forgetful state of consciousness is that there is here no effort or seeking needed
but simply a turning or opening of the inner light on whatever field of knowledge, and therefore it is not a
recalling of things forgotten and self-hidden from the mind, but a luminous presentation of things already present,
ready and available. This last condition is only possible by a partial supramentalising of the intuitive mentality and
its full openness to any and every communication from the supramental ranges. This mind of knowledge is in its
essentiality a power of potential omnipotence, but in its actual working on the level of mind it is limited in its range
and province. The character of limitation applies to the supermind itself when it descends into the mental level
and works in the lesser substance of mentality, though in its own manner and body of power and light, and it
persists even in the action of the supramental reason. It is only the higher supramental Shakti
Page 888

acting on its own ranges whose will and knowledge work always in a boundless light or with a free capacity of
illimitable extension of knowledge subject only to such limitations as are self-imposed for its own purposes and at
its own will by the spirit.
\par The human mind developing into supermind has to pass through all these stages and in its ascent and
expansion it may experience many changes and various dispositions of the powers and possibilities of its time
consciousness and time knowledge. At first man in the mind of ignorance can neither live in the infinite time
consciousness nor command any direct and real power of the triple time knowledge. The mind of ignorance lives,
not in the indivisible continuity of time, but successively in each moment. It has a vague sense of the continuity of
self and of an essential continuity of experience, a sense of which the source is the deeper self within us, but as it
does not live in that self, also it does not live in a true time continuity, but only uses this vague but still insistent
awareness as a background, support and assurance in what would otherwise be to it a constant baseless flux of
its being. In its practical action its only support other than its station in the present is the line left behind by the
past and preserved in memory, the mass of impressions deposited by previous experience and, for the future, an
assurance of the regularity of experience and a power of uncertain forecast founded partly upon repeated
experience and well-founded inference and partly on imaginative construction and conjecture. The mind of
ignorance relies on a certain foundation or element of relative or moral certainties, but for the rest a dealing with
probabilities and possibilities is its chief resource.
\par This is because the mind in the Ignorance lives in the moment and moves from hour to hour like a traveller
who sees only what is near and visible around his immediate standpoint and remembers imperfectly what he has
passed through before, but all in front beyond his immediate view is the unseen and unknown of which he has yet
to have experience. Therefore man in his self-ignorance moving in time exists, as the Buddhists saw, only in the
succession of thoughts and sensations and of
Page 889

the external forms present to his thought and sense. His present momentary self is alone real to him, his past self
is dead or vanishing or only preserved in memory, result and impression, his future self is entirely non-existent or
only in process of creation or preparation of birth. And the world around him is subject to the same rule of
perception. Only its actual form and sum of happenings and phenomena is present and quite real to him, its past
is no longer in existence or abides only in memory and record and in so much of it as has left its dead monuments
or still survives into the present, the future is not yet at all in existence.
\par It must be noted however that if our knowledge of the present were not limited by our dependence on the
physical mind and sense, this result would not be altogether inevitable. If we could be aware of all the present, all
the action of physical, vital, mental energies at work in the moment, it is conceivable that we would be able to see
their past too involved in them and their latent future or at least to proceed from present to past and future
knowledge. And under certain conditions this might create a sense of real and ever present time continuity, a
living in the behind and the front as well as the immediate, and a step farther might carry us into an ever present
sense of our existence in infinite time and in our timeless self, and its manifestation in eternal time might then
become real to us and also we might feel the timeless Self behind the worlds and the reality of his eternal world
manifestation. In any case the possibility of another kind of time consciousness than we have at present and of a
triple time knowledge rests upon the possibility of developing another consciousness than that proper to the
physical mind and sense and breaking our imprisonment in the moment and in the mind of ignorance with its
limitation to sensation, memory, inference and conjecture.
\par Actually man is not content solely with living in the present, though it is that he does with the most pressing
vividness and insistence: he is moved to look before and after, to know as much as he can of the past and try to
penetrate as far as he can, however obscurely, into the future. And he has certain aids towards this endeavour of
which some depend on his surface
Page 890

mind, while others open to intimations from another subliminal or superconscient self which has a greater, subtler
and more certain knowledge. His first aid is that of the reason proceeding forward from cause to effect and
backward from effect to cause, discovering the law of energies and their assured mechanic process, assuming
the perpetual sameness of the movements of Nature, fixing her time measures and thus calculating on the basis
of a science of general lines and assured results the past and the future. A certain measure of limited but
sufficiently striking success has been gained by this method in the province of physical Nature and it might seem
that the same process might eventually be applied to the movements of mind and life and that at any rate this
alone is man's one reliable means in any field of looking with precision back and forwards. But as a matter of
fact the happenings of vital and still more of mental nature escape to a very great degree the means of inference
and calculation from assured law that apply in the field of physical knowledge: it can apply there only to a limited
range of regularised happenings and phenomena and for the rest leaves us where we were amid a mixed mass
of relative certainties, uncertain probabilities and incalculable possibilities.
\par This is because mind and life bring in a great subtlety and intricacy of movement, each realised movement
carries in it a complex of forces, and even if we could disengage all these, all, that is to say, that are simply
actualised and on or near the surface, we should still be baffled by all the rest that is obscure or
latent,—concealed and yet potent contributory causes, hidden motion and motive force, undeployed possibilities,
uncalculated and incalculable chances of variation. It ceases to be practicable here for our limited intelligence to
calculate accurately and with certitude as in the physical field from precise cause to precise effect, that is to say,
from a given apparent set of existing conditions to an inevitable resultant of subsequent or a necessary
precedence of antecedent conditions. It is for this reason that the predictions and previsions of the human
intelligence are constantly baffled and contradicted by the event, even when largest in their view of the data and
most careful in their survey
Page 891

of possible consequence. Life and mind are a constant flux of possibles intervening between spirit and matter and
at each step bring in, if not an infinite, at least an indefinite of possibles, and this would be enough to make all
logical calculation uncertain and relative. But in addition there reigns behind them a supreme factor incalculable
by human mind, the will of the soul and secret spirit, the first indefinitely variable, fluid and elusive, the second
infinite and inscrutably imperative, bound, if at all, only by itself and the Will in the Infinite. It is therefore only by
going back from the surface physical mind to the psychic and spiritual consciousness that a vision and knowledge
of the triple time, a transcendence of our limitation to the standpoint and view range of the moment, can be
wholly possible.
\par Meanwhile there are certain doors opening from the inner on to the outer consciousness which make an
occasional but insufficient power of direct retro-vision of the past, circumvision of the present, prevision of the
future even in the physical mind at least potentially feasible. First, there are certain movements of the mind sense
and the vital consciousness that are of this character—of which one kind, that which has most struck our
perceptions, has been called presentiment. These movements are instinctive perceptions, obscure intuitions of the
sense mind and the vital being, and like all that is instinctive in man have been suppressed, rendered rare or
discredited as unreliable by the engrossing activity of the mental intelligence. If allowed a free scope, these could
develop and supply data not available to the ordinary reason and the senses. But still they would not be of
themselves perfectly useful or reliable indices unless their obscurity were enlightened by an interpretation and
guidance which the ordinary intelligence cannot give, but a higher intuition could provide. Intuition, then, is the
second and more important possible means available to us, and actually intuition can and does sometimes give us
in this difficult field an occasional light and guidance. But acting in our present mentality it is subject to the
disadvantage that it is uncertain in operation, imperfect in its functioning, obscured by false imitative movements
of the imagination and fallible mental judgment and continually seized
Page 892

on and alloyed and distorted by the normal action of mind with its constant liability to error. The formation of an
organised intuitive mentality purified from these deficiencies would be needed to enlarge and assure this
possibility of the functioning of a higher luminous intelligence.
\par Man, confronted by this incapacity of the intelligence and yet avid of the knowledge of the future, has fallen
back on other and external means, omens, sortileges, dreams, astrology and many other alleged data for a past
and future knowledge that have been in less sceptical times formulated as veridical sciences. Challenged and
discredited by the sceptical reason these still persist in attracting our minds and hold their own, supported by
desire and credulity and superstition, but also by the frequent though imperfect evidence we get of a certain
measure of truth in their pretensions. A higher psychical knowledge shows us that in fact the world is full of
many systems of correspondences and indices and that these things, however much misused by the human
intelligence, can in their place and under right conditions give us real data of a supraphysical knowledge. It is
evident, however, that it is only an intuitive knowledge that can discover and formulate them,—as it was in fact
the psychical and intuitive mind that originally formulated these ways of veridical knowledge,—and it will be
found in practice that only an intuitive knowledge, not the mere use either of a traditional or a haphazard
interpretation or of mechanical rule and formula, can ensure a right employment of these indices. Otherwise,
handled by the surface intelligence, they are liable to be converted into a thick jungle of error.
\par The true and direct knowledge or vision of past, present and future begins with the opening of the psychical
consciousness and the psychical faculties. The psychical consciousness is that of what is now often called the
subliminal self, the subtle or dream self of Indian psychology, and its range of potential knowledge, almost infinite
as has been pointed out in the last chapter, includes a very large power and many forms of insight into both the
possibilities and the definite actualities of past, present and future. Its first faculty, that which most readily
Page 893

\NH attracts attention, is its power of seeing by the psychical sense images of all things in time and space. As
exercised by clairvoyants, mediums and others this is often, and indeed usually, a specialised faculty limited
though often precise and accurate in action, and implies no development of the inner soul or the spiritual being or
the higher intelligence. It is a door opened by chance or by an innate gift or by some kind of pressure between
the waking and the subliminal mind and admitting only to the surface or the outskirts of the latter. All things in a
certain power and action of the secret universal mind are represented by images—not only visual but, if one may
use the phrase, auditory and other images,—and a certain development of the subtle or psychical senses makes it
possible,—if there is no interference of the constructing mind and its imaginations, if, that is to say, artificial or
falsifying mental images do not intervene, if the psychical sense is free, sincere and passive,—to receive these
representations or transcriptions with a perfect accuracy and not so much predict as see in its correct images the
present beyond the range of the physical sense, the past and the future. The accuracy of this kind of seeing
depends on its being confined to a statement of the thing seen and the attempt to infer, interpret or otherwise go
beyond the visual knowledge may lead to much error unless there is at the same time a strong psychical intuition
fine, subtle and pure or a high development of the luminous intuitive intelligence.
\par A completer opening of the psychical consciousness leads us far beyond this faculty of vision by images and
admits us not indeed to a new time consciousness, but to many ways of the triple time knowledge. The subliminal
or psychic self can bring back or project itself into past states of consciousness and experience and anticipate or
even, though this is less common, strongly project itself into future states of consciousness and experience. It
does this by a temporary entering into or identification of its being or its power of experiencing knowledge with
either permanences or representations of the past and the future that are maintained in an eternal time
consciousness behind our mentality or thrown up by the eternity of supermind into
Page 894

an indivisible continuity of time vision. Or it may receive the impress of these things and construct a transcriptive
experience of them in the subtle ether of psychical being. Or it may call up the past from the subconscious
memory where it is always latent and give it in itself a living form and a kind of renewed memorative existence,
and equally it may call up from the depths of latency, where it is already shaped in the being, and similarly form
to itself and experience the future. It may by a kind of psychical thought vision or soul intuition—not the same
thing as the subtler and less concrete thought vision of the luminous intuitive intelligence—foresee or foreknow
the future or flash this soul intuition into the past that has gone behind the veil and recover it for present
knowledge. It can develop a symbolic seeing which conveys the past and the future through a vision of the
powers and significances that belong to supraphysical planes but are powerful for creation in the material
universe. It can feel the intention of the Divine, the mind of the gods, all things and their signs and indices that
descend upon the soul and determine the complex movement of forces. It can feel too the movement of forces
that represent or respond to the pressure—as it can perceive the presence and the action—of the beings of the
mental, vital and other worlds who concern themselves with our lives. It can gather on all hands all kinds of
indications of happenings in past, present and future time. It can receive before its sight the etheric writing,
\s{\=ak\=a\'sa lipi}, that keeps the record of all things past, transcribes all that is in process in the present, writes out
the future.
\par All these and a multitude of other powers are concealed in our subliminal being and with the waking of the
psychical consciousness can be brought to the surface. The knowledge of our past lives,—whether of past soul
states or personalities or scenes, occurrences, relations with others,—of the past lives of others, of the past of
the world, of the future, of present things that are beyond the range of our physical senses or the reach of any
means of knowledge open to the surface intelligence, the intuition and impressions not only of physical things, but
of the working of a past and present and future mind and life and soul
Page 895

in ourselves and others, the knowledge not only of this world but of other worlds or planes of consciousness and
their manifestations in time and of their intervention and workings and effects on the earth and its embodied souls
and their destinies, lies open to our psychical being, because it is close to the intimations of the universal, not
engrossed only or mainly with the immediate and not shut up into the narrow circle of the purely personal and
physical experience.
\par At the same time these powers are subject to this disadvantage that they are not by any means free from
liability to confusion and error, and especially the lower ranges and more outer workings of the psychical
consciousness are subject to dangerous influences, strong illusions, misleading, perverting and distorting
suggestions and images. A purified mind and heart and a strong and fine psychical intuition may do much to
protect from perversion and error, but even the most highly developed psychical consciousness cannot be
absolutely safe unless the psychical is illumined and uplifted by a higher force than itself and touched and
strengthened by the luminous intuitive mind and that again raised towards the supramental energy of the spirit.
The psychical consciousness does not derive its time knowledge from a direct living in the indivisible continuity of
the spirit and it has not to guide it a perfect intuitive discrimination or the absolute light of the higher truth
consciousness. It receives its time perceptions, like the mind, only in part and detail, is open to all kinds of
suggestions, and as its consequent range of truth is wider, more manifold too are its sources of error. And it is
not only that which was but that which might have been or tried and failed to be that comes to it out of the past,
not only that which is but that which may be or wishes to be that crowds on it from the present and not only
things to be but suggestions, intuitions, visions and images of many kinds of possibility that visit it from the future.
And always too there is the possibility of mental constructions and mental images interfering with the true truth
of things in the presentations of the psychical experience.
\par The coming of the intimations of the subliminal self to the surface and the activity of the psychical
consciousness tend to
Page 896

turn the mind of ignorance, with which we begin, increasingly though not perfectly into a mind of self-forgetful
knowledge constantly illuminated with intimations and upsurgings from the inner being, \s{antar\=atman}, rays from
the still concealed awareness of its whole self and infinite contents and from the awareness—representing itself
here as a sort of memory, a recalling or a bringing out—of an inherent and permanent but hidden knowledge of
past, present and future that is always carried within itself by the eternal spirit. But embodied as we are and
founded on the physical consciousness, the mind of ignorance still persists as a conditioning environment, an
intervening power and limiting habitual force obstructing and mixing with the new formation or, even in moments
of large illumination, at once a boundary wall and a strong substratum, and it imposes its incapacities and errors.
And to remedy this persistence the first necessity would seem to be the development of the power of a luminous
intuitive intelligence seeing the truth of time and its happenings as well as all other truth by intuitive thought and
sense and vision and detecting and extruding by its native light of discernment the intrusions of misprision and
error.
\par All intuitive knowledge comes more or less directly from the light of the self-aware spirit entering into the
mind, the spirit concealed behind mind and conscious of all in itself and in all its selves, omniscient and capable of
illumining the ignorant or the self-forgetful mind whether by rare or constant flashes or by a steady instreaming
light, out of its omniscience. This all includes all that was, is or will be in time and this omniscience is not limited,
impeded or baffled by our mental division of the three times and the idea and experience of a dead and no longer
existent and ill-remembered or forgotten past and a not yet existent and therefore unknowable future which is so
imperative for the mind in the ignorance. Accordingly the growth of the intuitive mind can bring with it the
capacity of a time knowledge which comes to it not from outside indices, but from within the universal soul of
things, its eternal memory of the past, its unlimited holding of things present and its prevision or, as it has been
paradoxically but suggestively called, its memory
Page 897

of the future. But this capacity works at first sporadically and uncertainly and not in an organised manner. As the
force of intuitive knowledge grows, it becomes more possible to command the use of the capacity and to
regularise to a certain degree its functioning and various movements. An acquired power can be established of
commanding the materials and the main or the detailed knowledge of things in the triple time, but this usually
forms itself as a special or abnormal power and the normal action of the mentality or a large part of it remains
still that of the mind of ignorance. This is obviously an imperfection and limitation and it is only when the power
takes its place as a normal and natural action of the wholly intuitivised mind that there can be said to be a
perfection of the capacity of the triple time knowledge so far as that is possible in the mental being.
\par It is by the progressive extrusion of the ordinary action of the intelligence, the acquiring of a complete and
total reliance on the intuitive self and a consequent intuitivising of all the parts of the mental being that the mind
of ignorance can be, more successfully, if not as yet wholly, replaced by the mind of self-contained knowledge.
But,—and especially for this kind of knowledge,—what is needed is the cessation of mental constructions built on
the foundation of the mind of ignorance. The difference between the ordinary mind and the intuitive is that the
former, seeking in the darkness or at most by its own unsteady torchlight, first, sees things only as they are
presented in that light and, secondly, where it does not know, constructs by imagination, by uncertain inference,
by others of its aids and makeshifts things which it readily takes for truth, shadow projections, cloud edifices,
unreal prolongations, deceptive anticipations, possibilities and probabilities which do duty for certitudes. The
intuitive mind constructs nothing in this artificial fashion, but makes itself a receiver of the light and allows the
truth to manifest in it and organise its own constructions. But so long as there is a mixed action and the mental
constructions and imaginations are allowed to operate, this passivity of the intuitive mind to the higher light, the
truth light, cannot be complete or securely dominate and there cannot therefore be a firm organisation of the
triple
Page 898

time knowledge. It is because of this obstruction and mixture that that power of time vision, of back-sight and
around-sight and foresight, which sometimes marks the illuminated mind, is not only an abnormal power among
others rather than part of the very texture of the mental action, but also occasional, very partial and marred often
by an undetected intermixture or a self-substituting intervention of error.
\par The mental constructions that interfere are mainly of two kinds, and the first and most powerfully distorting
are those which proceed from the stresses of the will claiming to see and determine, interfering with knowledge
and not allowing the intuition to be passive to the truth light and its impartial and pure channel. The personal will,
whether taking the shape of the emotions and the heart's wishes or of vital desires or of strong dynamic volitions
or the wilful preferences of the intelligence, is an evident source of distortion when these try, as they usually do
try with success, to impose themselves on the knowledge and make us take what we desire or will for the thing
that was, is or must be. For either they prevent the true knowledge from acting or if it at all presents itself, they
seize upon it, twist it out of shape and make the resultant deformation a justifying basis for a mass of will-created
falsehood. The personal will must either be put aside or else its suggestions must be kept in their place until a
supreme reference has been made to the higher impersonal light and then must be sanctioned or rejected
according to the truth that comes from deeper within than the mind or from higher above. But even if the
personal will is held in abeyance and the mind passive for reception, it may be assailed and imposed on by
suggestions from all sorts of forces and possibilities that strive in the world for realisation and come representing
the things cast up by them on the stream of their will-to-be as the truth of past, present or future. And if the mind
lends itself to these impostor suggestions, accepts their self-valuations, does not either put them aside or refer
them to the truth light, the same result of prevention or distortion of the truth is inevitable. There is a possibility of
the will element being entirely excluded and the mind being made a silent and passive register of a higher
Page 899

luminous knowledge, and in that case a much more accurate reception of time intuitions becomes possible. The
integrality of the being demands however a will action and not only an inactive knowing, and therefore the larger
and more perfect remedy is to replace progressively the personal by a universalised will which insists on nothing
that is not securely felt by it to be an intuition, inspiration or revelation of what must be from that higher light in
which will is one with knowledge.
\par The second kind of mental construction belongs to the very nature of our mind and intelligence and its
dealing with things in time. All is seen here by mind as a sum of realised actualities with their antecedents and
natural consequences, an indeterminate of possibilities and, conceivably, although of this it is not certain, a
determining something behind, a will, fate or Power, which rejects some and sanctions or compels others out of
many possibles. Its constructions therefore are made partly of inferences from the actual, both past and present,
partly of a volitional or an imaginative and conjectural selection and combining of possibilities and partly of a
decisive reasoning or preferential judgment or insistent creative will-intelligence that tries to fix among the mass
of actuals and possibles the definitive truth it is labouring to discover or determine. All this which is indispensable
to our thought and action in mind, has to be excluded or transformed before the intuitive knowledge can have a
chance of organising itself on a sound basis. A transformation is possible because the intuitive mind has to do the
same work and cover the same field, but with a different handling of the materials and another light upon their
significance. An exclusion is possible because all is really contained in the truth consciousness above and a
silencing of the mind of ignorance and a pregnant receptivity is not beyond our compass in which the intuitions
descending from the truth consciousness can be received with a subtle or strong exactitude and all the materials
of the knowledge seen in their right place and true proportion. As a matter of practice it will be found that both
methods are used alternatively or together to effect the transition from the one kind of mentality to the other.
\par The intuitive mind dealing with the triple time movement
Page 900

has to see rightly in thought sense and vision three things, actualities, possibles and imperatives. There is first a
primary intuitive action developed which sees principally the stream of successive actualities in time, even as the
ordinary mind, but with an immediate directness of truth and spontaneous accuracy of which the ordinary mind is
not capable. It sees them first by a perception, a thought action, a thought sense, a thought vision, which at once
detects the forces at work on persons and things, the thoughts, intentions, impulsions, energies, influences in and
around them, those already formulated in them and those in process of formation, those too that are coming or
about to come into or upon them from the environment or from secret sources invisible to the normal mind,
distinguishes by a rapid intuitive analysis free from seeking or labour or by a synthetic total view the complex of
these forces, discerns the effective from the ineffective or partly effective and sees too the result that is to
emerge. This is the integral process of the intuitive vision of actualities, but there are others that are less
complete in their character. For there may be developed a power of seeing the result without any previous or
simultaneous perception of the forces at work or the latter may be seen only afterwards and the result alone leap
at once and first into the knowledge. On the other hand there may be a partial or complete perception of the
complex of forces, but an incertitude of the definitive result or only a slowly arriving or relative certitude. These
are stages in the development of the capacity for a total and unified vision of actualities.
\par This kind of intuitive knowledge is not an entirely perfect instrument of time knowledge. It moves normally in
the stream of the present and sees rightly from moment to moment only the present, the immediate past and the
immediate future. It may, it is true, project itself backward and reconstruct correctly by the same power and
process a past action or project itself forward and reconstruct correctly something in the more distant future. But
this is for the normal power of the thought vision a more rare and difficult effort and usually it needs for a freer
use of this self-projection the aid and support of the psychical seeing.
Page 901

Moreover it can see only what will arrive in the undisturbed process of the actualities and its vision no longer
applies if some unforeseen rush of forces or intervening power comes down from regions of a larger potentiality
altering the complex of conditions, and this is a thing that constantly happens in the action of forces in the time
movement. It may help itself by the reception of inspirations that illumine to it these potentialities and of
imperative revelations that indicate what is decisive in them and its sequences and by these two powers correct
the limitations of the intuitive mind of actuality. But the capacity of this first intuitive action to deal with these
greater sources of vision is never quite perfect, as must always be the case with an inferior power in its
treatment of the materials given to it from a greater consciousness. A considerable limitation of vision by its
stress on the stream of immediate actualities must be always its character.
\par It is possible however to develop a mind of luminous inspiration which will be more at home among the
greater potentialities of the time movement, see more easily distant things and at the same time take up into itself,
into its more brilliant, wide and powerful light, the intuitive knowledge of actualities. This inspired mind will see
things in the light of the world's larger potentialities and note the stream of actuality as a selection and result from
the mass of forceful possibles. It will be liable, however, if it is not attended with a sufficient revelatory
knowledge of imperatives, to a hesitation or suspension of determining view as between various potential lines of
the movement or even to a movement away from the line of eventual actuality and following another not yet
applicable sequence. The aid of imperative revelations from above will help to diminish this limitation, but here
again there will be the difficulty of an inferior power dealing with the materials given to it from the treasury of a
higher light and force. But it is possible to develop too a mind of luminous revelation which taking into itself the
two inferior movements sees what is determined behind the play of potentialities and actualities and observes
these latter as its means of deploying its imperative decisions. An intuitive mind thus constituted and
Page 902

aided by an active psychic consciousness may be in command of a very remarkable power of time knowledge.
\par At the same time it will be found that it is still a limited instrument. In the first place it will represent a
superior knowledge working in the stuff of mind, cast into mental forms and still subject to mental conditions and
limitations. It will always lean chiefly on the succession of present moments as a foundation for its steps and
successions of knowledge, however far it may range backward or forward,—it will move in the stream of Time
even in its higher revelatory action and not see the movement from above or in the stabilities of eternal time with
their large ranges of vision, and therefore it will always be bound to a secondary and limited action and to a
certain dilution, qualification and relativity in its activities. Moreover, its knowing will be not a possession in itself
but a reception of knowledge. It will at most create in place of the mind of ignorance a mind of self-forgetful
knowledge constantly reminded and illumined from a latent self-awareness and all-awareness. The range, the
extent, the normal lines of action of the knowledge will vary according to the development, but it can never be
free from very strong limitations. And this limitation will give a tendency to the still environing or subconsciously
subsisting mind of ignorance to reassert itself, to rush in or up, acting where the intuitive knowledge refuses or is
unable to act and bringing in with it again its confusion and mixture and error. The only security will be a refusal
to attempt to know or at least a suspension of the effort of knowledge until or unless the higher light descends
and extends its action. This self-restraint is difficult to mind and, too contentedly exercised, may limit the growth
of the seeker. If on the other hand the mind of ignorance is allowed again to emerge and seek in its own
stumbling imperfect force, there may be a constant oscillation between the two states or a mixed action of the
two powers in place of a definite though relative perfection.
\par The issue out of this dilemma is to a greater perfection towards which the formation of the intuitive, inspired
and revelatory mind is only a preparatory stage, and that comes by a constant instreaming and descent of more
and more of the
Page 903

supramental light and energy into the whole mental being and a constant raising of the intuition and its powers
towards their source in the open glories of the supramental nature. There is then a double action of the intuitive
mind aware of, open to and referring its knowledge constantly to the light above it for support and confirmation
and of that light itself creating a highest mind of knowledge,—really the supramental action itself in a more and
more transformed stuff of mind and a less and less insistent subjection to mental conditions. There is thus formed
a lesser supramental action, a mind of knowledge tending always to change into the true supermind of
knowledge. The mind of ignorance is more and more definitely excluded, its place taken by the mind of
self-forgetful knowledge illumined by the intuition, and the intuition itself more perfectly organised becomes
capable of answering to a larger and larger call upon it. The increasing mind of knowledge acts as an
intermediary power and, as it forms itself, it works upon the other, transforms or replaces it and compels the
farther change which effects the transition from mind to supermind. It is here that a change begins to take place
in the time consciousness and time knowledge which finds its base and complete reality and significance only on
the supramental levels. It is therefore in relation to the truth of supermind that its workings can be more
effectively elucidated: for the mind of knowledge is only a projection and a last step in the ascent towards the
supramental nature.

\preface
\par
Page 904

\ht Appendix to Part IV
\par\nodrop
Sri Aurobindo began another chapter of “The Yoga of Self-Perfection” before deciding to discontinue the
publication of the {\it Arya}. He wrote two versions of the opening of this chapter, which are reproduced here
from his typescript.

\chapter
\par
Page 905

\hn Chapter XXVI
\par
\ht The Supramental Time Consciousness

\section
\par
\ht [Version A]
\par The supermind in its supreme status is the truth-consciousness of the Infinite, the inherent light and power of
self-knowledge and all-knowledge of the Supreme who is the self of all, the living eternal truth of all that is and of
whom all objects and beings, all the universe and motion of things and happenings in time is a partial continually
proceeding manifestation. The Supreme organises through the power of self-realisation and self-manifestation
that resides in this self-knowledge and all-knowledge all truth of his being that he has the will and delight to put
forth in his universal existence,—to create, as we say from our standpoint. But this creation is not a making or
bringing into being of that which was non-existent, neither is it a construction of illusory phenomena in a self of
dream, but a revelation in condition of being, substance of consciousness, movement of force, name, form, idea,
significance, of the truths of being of the Eternal. All that manifests itself in time, is the coming into play,
effective disclosure, result, form, power, evolution, movement of some truth of being, a truth of Sat, of the eternal
existence of the Supreme and Eternal.
\par The power that brings it into play is the infinite consciousness of the Supreme aware of itself and all that is
itself, not a limited mental consciousness like ours but supramental and illimitable, not bound by this or that
condition, but determining out of an infinite truth of self-existence its own conditions, nor by this or that relation or
step and sequence, but capable of all possible relations and steps and sequences. It is a power or force inherent
in that consciousness which spontaneously, sovereignly
Page 907

and imperatively compels into manifestation the truth it sees and dwells on and evolves its play, combinations,
sequences, not a limited mental will and power like ours, but a conscious force supramental and illimitable, Tapas,
Chit-shakti, not bound to this or that movement and result of energy, but ordering out of the infinite truth of
self-existence the movement and result of all possible energies. And it is finally an Ananda of the being that
deploys itself, that ranges at will among the infinities of consciousness and of its power of manifestation, not a
limited mental joy or pleasure like our chequered delight of being and action and feeling, but supramental and
illimitable, not subject to a given set of reactions, but embracing and taking a free and sovereign and compelling
delight of all that is possible in the truth of the infinite consciousness and existence.
\par
\ht [Version B]
\par It is necessary in order to understand the phenomena of the supramental time consciousness to realise very
firmly certain truths which are strange to our ordinary mentality or presented to it only as constructions of the
metaphysical intellect, intelligible but unsubstantial abstractions as all mere philosophical statements must be, but
to the supermind are realised experience and the normal and natural truth of the consciousness in which it lives,
moves, acts and manifests its being. It is only in their light that we can grasp the truth and reality and the
manifestation of things in time, otherwise only an illusion or else a flux of transient, inexplicable and incalculable
actualities, and the law, source and order of their manifestation, otherwise only a process of inscrutable Law or
else a play of chance and probabilities and possibilities. The truths that reveal the inner meaning and way of the
universe are of a spiritual and supramental order. It is difficult however to express them at all in a language
adapted to the mental intellect and one can at most try to indicate.
\par The first of the truths that thus becomes real to the consciousness is the truth of infinite being, a thing
abstract to
Page 908

our present sense and intelligence to which only phenomena are concrete and real, but to the supramental being
always and absolutely and intimately present and real. This indeed is that which to its knowledge, sense, vision,
idea, feeling is most \NH concretely real and the phenomena which are now so close and all-important to us, are
to it less concrete, not self-existent at all but dependent on the support of the infinite consciousness and its force
of presentation: there is thus a complete reversal of the order in the conception of realities. It is not that the
phenomena in their turn become abstract, unreal, unsubstantial creations of consciousness,—that is only the
result of a certain exclusive realisation, when there is an identification with the essence of absolute being to the
exclusion of its power,—but that they are felt as existing here only in a certain movement of the infinite, real only
because they are made, as it were, out of the substance of infinite being. That which determines them, the truth
of their essence and nature, \sforced{svar\=upa}, \sforced{svabh\=ava}, that which gives them the power to be, is
not originally here, but above in the supreme being and consciousness of the infinite. All their true truth, all their
real reality is there in that supreme consciousness and here only hidden in the inmost heart of their existence,
\sforced{guh\=ay\=am}, but not fully expressed in their overt outward phenomena. Therefore to know them only
through the externals or through superficial inner movements which is all that our mind now does, is to miss their
true truth and reality and to know them only with a partial and mistaken knowledge subject to the limitations,
errors, incapacities of the mental ignorance. All that determines their manifestation in our time and space is also
beyond and here only in the hidden secrecy within them, and therefore the mind following their line of
manifestation misses that which determines them and can only see a part of the actually present outward
executive play of forces that help to give them their immediate character and direction. It is only the
consciousness that reigns above, that of the supreme Ishwara, and is present in their secret heart,
\sforced{h\,rdde\'se ti\,s\,thati}, that knows and determines all their true truth and their manifestation in eternal time.
Page 909

\par This supreme of infinite being is supreme in the sense of being above the manifestation in time, its eternal
origin, support, control, itself beyond time and space. It is this of which the supermind, itself a luminous power of
this supreme of infinite being, is always and fundamentally conscious.
Page 910

\preface
\par
\ht Note on the Text
\par\fsqstart
Page 911

\section
\par
\ht Note on the Text
\par\nodrop THE SYNTHESIS OF YOGA first appeared in seventy-seven monthly instalments in the
philosophical review {\it Arya}, beginning with its first issue, August 1914, and continuing until its last, January
1921. The {\it Arya} text of the {\it Synthesis} consisted of five introductory chapters numbered I--V and
seventy-two other chapters numbered I--II and IV--LXXIII (the number III was inadvertently omitted). Each of
the instalments was written immediately before its publication.
\par In the {\it Arya} the division of the main series of chapters into four parts, corresponding to the yogas of
Works, Knowledge, Devotion and Self-Perfection, was not marked explicitly until the fifth year, when the
heading “The Yoga of Self-Perfection” began to be added above the chapter numbers.
\par{\it The Synthesis of Yoga} was left incomplete when the {\it Arya} ceased publication in January 1921.
Before abandoning the work, Sri \NH Aurobindo wrote part of a chapter entitled “The Supramental Time
Consciousness”, which was meant to follow the last published chapter of “The Yoga of Self-Perfection”. He
never completed this chapter and never published the portion that he had written.
\par A letter that Sri Aurobindo wrote in 1936 gives some idea of his purpose in writing {\it The Synthesis of
Yoga} and his overall plan for the work:
\par
\SF{\it The Synthesis of Yoga} was not meant to give a method for all to follow. Each side of the Yoga was
dealt with separately with all its possibilities, and an indication [was given] as to how they meet so that one
starting from knowledge could realise Karma and Bhakti also and so with each path. It was intended when the
Self-Perfection was finished, to suggest a way in which all could be combined, but this was never written.
\par
One can gauge how much of {\it The Synthesis of Yoga} remained to be written by comparing the actually
completed chapters of “The Yoga of Self-Perfection” with the outline of this part found in chapter X of Part IV.
The “elements and requisites of perfection, {\it siddhi}” which are set forth discursively in that chapter are listed
more explicitly in {\it Sapta Chatusthaya}, a text of 1913 published along with {\it Record of Yoga} in volume 10
of {\it The Complete Works of Sri Aurobindo}. The system of seven ({\it sapta}) sets of four elements ({\it
catu\,s\,taya}) evidently underlies the structure of Part IV of {\it The Synthesis of Yoga}. The last and most
general {\it catu\,s\,taya}, the {\it siddhi catu\,s\,taya}, is taken up first, in chapters I to IX. Chapters XI to XVIII
correspond to the {\it \'s\=anti} and {\it samat\=a catu\,s\,tayas}, the first two of the seven. Chapters XIX to XXV, and
the incomplete chapter “The Supramental Time Consciousness”, correspond to the first two elements of the third
or {\it vij\~n\=ana catu\,s\,taya}. By breaking off at this point, Sri Aurobindo left untreated the rest of the third and all of
the fourth {\it catu\,s\,tayas}. He had covered the fifth and sixth {\it catu\,s\,tayas} to some degree in the rest of the
{\it Synthesis}, but undoubtedly intended to deal with them in more depth before concluding.
\par When Sri Aurobindo turned his attention to {\it The Synthesis of Yoga} during the 1930s after a gap of more
than a decade, he made no effort to complete “The Yoga of Self-Perfection”. Instead he applied himself to the
revision of already existing chapters.
\par
\ht The Revision of {\it The Synthesis of Yoga}
\par Sri Aurobindo revised the text of {\it The Synthesis of Yoga} during three distinct periods, referred to below
as Period 1, Period 2, and Period 3.
\par
{\ftextb Period 1.} At various times after the printed text of the {\it Arya} began to appear, perhaps up to the
end of the 1920s, Sri Aurobindo made corrections to certain chapters of {\it The Synthesis of Yoga} while
reading over his own copies of the journal. Most of these chapters received only sporadic and minor revision;
two chapters of Part II, however, were substantially altered.
\par{\ftextb Period 2.} During 1932, and possibly somewhat before and after, Sri Aurobindo undertook
a full-scale revision of {\it The Synthesis of Yoga} with a view to publishing it as a book. At this time he revised
all the chapters of what became Part I, “The Yoga of Divine Works”, and nine chapters of what became Part II,
“The Yoga of Integral Knowledge” (the addition of part-titles was part of the revision). He began this work by
marking up pages torn from the {\it Arya} and then continued on copies handwritten or typed by disciples.
\par\noindent{\ftextb Period 3.} During the early 1940s, Sri Aurobindo did further work on the later chapters of
Part I, using typed copies of the pages from the {\it Arya} revised during Period 2. At the same time he began to
write two new chapters, which he apparently intended to add to this part, but which he abandoned before
completion.
\par During the later part of the 1940s, Sri Aurobindo lightly revised the entire first part of the {\it Synthesis}
while preparing it for publication.
\par What follows is a brief part-by-part description of the revision.
\par
\ht{\ftextb Introduction: The Conditions of the Synthesis}
\par\noindent\ftext Sri Aurobindo made sporadic minor changes to these five chapters during Period 1 and
possibly also Period 2 of the revision. His alterations and additions, marked in issues of the {\it Arya} and a set
of pages torn from the journal, were not discovered until the 1970s, and appear as part of the text for the first
time in the present edition.
\par
\ht{\ftextb Part I: The Yoga of Divine Works}
\par\noindent The twelve chapters of this part correspond to eleven {\it Arya} chapters: I--II and IV--XII. (There
was no chapter numbered III in the {\it Arya}; the present chapters V and VI correspond to {\it Arya} chapter
VI.) Sri Aurobindo revised each of these chapters during Period 2. The work done ranges from the light
retouching of some pages to the rewriting or new-writing of long passages. During Period 3 he continued the
work of revision begun in Period 2, concentrating on the last six chapters, and prepared the entire part for
publication.
\par
\PF{\ftextb Chapter I}. Moderately revised during Period 2.
\par\noindent{\ftextb Chapters II--IV}. Heavily revised during Period 2. Sri Aurobindo added the entire second
half of chapter IV at this time. He also made stylistic changes and added new material to all three chapters, but
did not fundamentally alter their structure.
\par\noindent{\ftextb Chapters V and VI}. Completely rewritten during Period 2 on the basis of {\it Arya}
chapter VI, little of which remains in the final text.
\par\noindent{\ftextb Chapters VII--XII.} Extensively revised during Periods 2 and 3. The typed sheets
containing the later stages of the Period 2 revision of chapters VII and VIII were misplaced before the start of
Period 3, obliging Sri Aurobindo to work on transcripts of the {\it Arya} pages containing only the earlier stages
of the revision. The unused versions from Period 2 have since been found, and are reproduced in the reference
volume (volume 35).
\par\noindent{\ftextb Appendix: Chapter XIII.} During Period 3, Sri Aurobindo wrote this draft of a chapter
meant to follow the last complete chapter of Part I, but did not prepare it for publication in the 1948 edition of the
{\it Synthesis}. Found among his papers after his passing, it was published for the first time in the 1955 edition of
the book.
\par Around the same time that Sri Aurobindo worked on the chapter published as “Appendix: Chapter XIII”, he
produced several drafts of a chapter entitled “The Yogic Consciousness and Works”, which he also intended to
place at the end of Part I. None of these drafts are sufficiently well worked out to be published as part of the
text of {\it The Synthesis of Yoga}. The most important of them are reproduced in the reference volume
(volume 35).
\par
\ht Part II: The Yoga of Integral Knowledge
\par These twenty-eight chapters correspond to {\it Arya} chapters XIII--XL. Sri Aurobindo revised eleven of
these chapters during Periods 1 and 2, but did not prepare any of them for publication. The Period 2 revision was
incorporated into the text of the 1955 edition; the Period 1 revision was not discovered until the 1970s and
appears in print for the first time in the present edition.
\par
\PF{\ftextb Chapter I.} Extensively revised during Period 2.
\par\noindent{\ftextb Chapter II.} First four paragraphs revised significantly during Period 2.
\par\noindent{\ftextb Chapters III--VIII.} Never revised.
\par\noindent{\ftextb Chapter IX.} Extensively revised during Period 2.
\par\noindent{\ftextb Chapters X--XIV.} Never revised.
\par\noindent{\ftextb Chapter XV.} Moderately revised during Period 1.
\par\noindent{\ftextb Chapter XVI.} One page lightly revised during Period 1.
\par\noindent{\ftextb Chapter XVII.} Some of the later paragraphs revised significantly during Period 1; the first
paragraph separately revised during Period 2. The present text includes both sets of revision, which do not
overlap.
\par\noindent{\ftextb Chapters XVIII--XX.} Never revised.
\par\noindent{\ftextb Chapters XXI--XXIV.} Extensively revised during Period 2.
\par\noindent{\ftextb Chapter XXV.} Never revised.
\par\noindent{\ftextb Chapter XXVI.} Lightly revised during Period 2.
\par\noindent{\ftextb Chapters XXVII and XXVIII.} Never revised.
\par
\ht Part III: The Yoga of Divine Love
\par No chapter in this part was ever revised by Sri Aurobindo. The texts of these eight chapters are identical to
those of {\it Arya} chapters XLI--XLVIII. They were renumbered I--VIII and the part-title was added by the
editors of the 1955 edition.
\par
\ht Part IV: The Yoga of Self-Perfection
\par No chapter in this part was ever revised by Sri Aurobindo. The texts of these twenty-five chapters are
identical to those of {\it Arya} chapters XLIX--LXXIII. They were renumbered I--XXV by the editors of the
1955 edition. The Appendix consists of two incomplete versions of a chapter Sri Aurobindo began to write in
1920 or 1921, just before he discontinued the {\it Arya}.
\par
\ht Publishing History
\par\noindent The revised versions of chapters VII--XII of Part I of {\it The Synthesis of Yoga} were published
in the quarterly review {\it Advent} between August 1946 and April 1948. The entire first part was published by
the Sri Aurobindo Library, Madras, in October 1948. In 1950, and again in 1953, the same text was brought out
by the Sri Aurobindo Library, New York. In each of these editions, the title of the book was given as {\it The
Synthesis of Yoga}. A half-title specified that the contents consisted only of Part I (“Book One” in the American
edition) of the complete work. Separate publication of the other parts had been planned, but this plan was never
carried out.
\par In 1955, the {\it Arya} text of the Introduction, the 1948 text of Part I, a text of Part II incorporating Sri
Aurobindo's revisions from Period 2, and the {\it Arya} texts of the chapters comprising Part III and Part IV,
were published by the Sri Aurobindo International University Centre as {\it On Yoga I: The Synthesis of Yoga}.
({\it On Yoga II}, published in 1958, consisted of a selection of Sri Aurobindo's letters on yoga.) The incomplete
chapter “The Supermind and the Yoga of Works” appeared in this edition for the first time as chapter XIII of
Part I. The SAIUC edition was reprinted, with corrections, in 1957. The same publisher (under the new name Sri
Aurobindo International Centre of Education) issued a new edition of the same text in 1965.
\par In 1970 {\it The Synthesis of Yoga} was published as volumes 20 and 21 of the Sri Aurobindo Birth
Centenary Library. This edition was reprinted many times.
\par In 1999 {\it The Synthesis of Yoga} was issued as volumes 23 and 24 of The Complete Works of Sri
Aurobindo. The text of this edition was carefully checked against all related manuscripts and printed texts. Many
typographical and other errors were corrected. This edition included for the first time Sri Aurobindo's scattered
revisions in the Introduction and substantial revision of chapters XV--XVII of Part II. It was the first edition of
the book to include the text of “The Supramental Time Consciousness”, the incomplete chapter Sri Aurobindo
wrote for Part IV before setting aside “The Yoga of Self-Perfection”.
\par The text of the present, electronic, edition (1999) is identical to the text of the CWSA edition. For the
convenience of those who use the SABCL edition, SABCL page numbers are provided as well as the CWSA
page numbers.
\par\fsqend
